TRANSLATION. 


211 


CHAPTER  III. 

OF  THE  WORK  FURNACE. 

Near  the  wall,  by  the  window,  on  the  left  side  of  the  person 
sitting,  a  piece  of  wood  is  fixed  in  the  ground  (three  ^  feet  in 
length)  in  width  two  and  in  thickness  scarcely  two  fingers, 
which,  when  it  is  firmly  fixed,  may  have  a  perforation  in  the 
midst  of  the  size  of  a  finger,  four  fingers  high  above  the 
ground.  Let  it  have  also  in  front  a  straight  piece  of  wood 
joined  to  it,  and  fixed  with  wooden  pegs,  four  fingers  in 
breadth,  and  the  length  of  which  is  equal  to  the  large  piece 
of  wood.  In  front  of  this  you  fasten  another  wood  of  equal 
breadth  and  length,  so  that  between  these  two  woods  there 
may  be  a  space  of  four  fingers,  and  fasten  that  outside  by  two 
or  three  stakes ;  and  taking  clay,  not  beaten,  nor  mixed  with 
water,  but  newly  dug  up,  put  at  first  a  little  of  it  into  this 
space,  and  compress  it  strongly  with  a  rounded  piece  of  wood, 
then  more,  and  again  beat  it ;  and  do  thus  until  two  parts  of 
this  space  are  filled,  and  leave  the  third  empty.  Then  take 
away  the  wood  in  front,  and  with  a  long  knife  cut  the  clay 
evenly  in  front  and  on  the  top,  then  with  a  thin  piece  of  wood 
beat  it  strongly.  After  this  take  clay  beaten  and  mixed  with 
horse  dung,  and  make  the  furnace  and  its  hearth,  covering 
the  wall  that  it  may  not  be  burned  by  the  fire,  and  with  a 
slender  piece  of  wood  perforate  the  clay  through  the  opening 
which  is  in  the  wood  behind.  In  this  manner  compose  all 
-smith's  furnaces. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

OF  THE  BELLOWS. 

Then  make  bellows  from  the  skins  of  rams,  thus  : — When  the 
rams  are  killed,  the  skins  must  not  be  cut  under  the  belly, 
but  they  are  opened  behind,  and  are  so  turned  over  that  they 

'  From  the  Wolfenhuttel  Manuscript. 

p  2 


212 


THEOPHILT   LIBER  III. 


hantur,  et  impletae  stramine  modice  exsiccentur.  Postea  jaceant 
in  confectione  fsecis  et  salis  una  die  et  dnabus  noctibus,  tertia 
vero  die  trahantur  in  retorta  in  longitudine,  sed  plus  in  lati- 
tudine.  Deinde  ungantur  et  iterum  trahantur.  Posthsec 
fiat  folli  caput  ligneum,  quod  transeat  per  colluni  ejus  et 
ibi  ligetur,  et  in  capite  foramen  per  quod  transeat  fistula 
ferrea.  Retro  vero  in  latitudine  follis  ponantur  quatuor  Jigna, 
quorum  duo  sibi  conj  ungantur  et  colligentur  in  medio,  et  duo 
sibi  deinde  suantur  in  foUe  ita,  ut  juncturae  in  medio  sint  su- 
perius  et  inferius,  ubi  etiam  duse  ansae  ex  eadem  pelle  con- 
suantur,  una  superius  minor,  in  qua  pollex  imponatur,  altera 
major  inferius,  ubi  reliqui  quatuor  digiti  immittantur.  His 
completis  pone  fistulam  ferream  in  foramen  fornacis,  et  retro 
et  ante  fornacem  carbones  et  ignem,  et  suffla  ut  fornax  exsic- 
cetur.  Utensiliorum  autem  et  ferramentorum  nomina  in  fabrili 
opere  sunt  haec. 


CAPUT  V. 

DE  INCUDIBUS. 

INCUDES  latae,  aequales  et  quadrae.  Item  incudes  aequales 
et  cornutae.  Item  incudes  superius  rotundae  in  similitudine 
dimidii  pomi,  una  major,  alia  minor,  tertia  brevis,  qui  vocan- 
tur  nodi.  Item  incudes  superius  longaB  et  strictae  quasi  duo 
cornua  ab  hastili  praecedentia,  quorum  unum  sit  rotundum  et 
deductum  ita,  ut  in  summitate  sit  gracile,  aliud  vero  latius  et 
in  summitate  modice  recurvum  in  rotunda  aequalitate  ad 
similitudinem  unius  pollicis.  Hae  sunt  majores  et  minores. 


TRANSLATION. 


213 


may  be  stripped  off  whole,  and  being  filled  with  straws,  they 
are  moderately  dried.  Afterwards  they  are  thrown  into  a 
preparation  of  lye  and  salt  for  a  day  and  two  nights,  the 
third  day  they  are  stretched  lengthwise,  but  more  in  breadth. 
Then  they  are  anointed  and  again  stretched.  After  this  the 
wooden  head  to  the  bellows  is  made,  which  passes  through 
its  neck  and  is  there  bound,  and  in  this  head  a  perforation 
through  which  an  iron  tube  may  pass.  But  behind,  in  the 
width  of  the  bellows,  four  pieces  of  wood  are  placed,  of  which 
two  are  joined  together  and  fixed  in  the  middle  ;  and  two  are 
sewed  upon  the  bellows  together,  so  that  the  joinings  in 
the  middle  may  be  above  and  below  ;  where  also  two  loops 
of  the  same  skin  are  sewed  on,  the  one  above  smaller,  in 
which  the  thumb  is  placed,  the  other  larger  below,  where  the 
other  four  fingers  are  put.  These  things  finished,  place  the 
iron  tube  in  the  hole  of  the  furnace,  and  fire  and  charcoal  at 
the  back  and  front  of  the  furnace,  and  blow,  that  the  furnace 
may  become  dry.  The  names  of  utensils  and  iron  instru- 
ments, in  work  of  fusion,  are  these. 


CHAPTER  V. 

OF  ANVILS. 


Anvils,  flat,  smooth  and  square.  Also  anvils  even  and 
horned.  Also  anvils  round  at  the  top,  like  half  an  apple,  one 
large,  another  smaller,  a  third  short,  which  are  called  knots. 
Also  anvils  long  and  narrow  on  the  top,  like  two  horns  pro- 
ceeding from  a  spear,  of  which  one  may  be  rounded  and 
diminishing  so  that  it  be  pointed  at  the  end,  but  the  other 
broader  and  shghtly  turned  round  at  the  end  with  round 
smoothness,  like  a  thumb.  These  are  made  large  and 
small. 


214 


THEOPHILI   LIBKR  III. 


CAPUT  VI. 

DE  MALLEIS. 

MALLEI  multi,  niajores,  minores  et  parvi,  in  una  parte 
lati,  in  altera  stricti.  Item  mallei  longi  et  graciles  in 
summitate  rotundi,  majores  et  minores.  Item  mallei  superius 
cornuti,  inferius  lati. 


CAPUT  VII. 

DE  FORCIPIBUS. 

FORCIPES  manuales  fortes,  habentes  nodos  in  summi- 
tate, majores  et  minores.  Item  forcipes  longi  et  gra- 
ciles. Item  forcipes  fusorii  longi,  et  in  anteriori  parte  modi- 
cum curvi.  Item  forcipes  mediocres,  quibus  limanda  quseque 
teneantur,  qui  sint  in  summitate  unius  caudae  graciles,  in 
altera  pendeat  ferrum  tenue  et  latum,  ac  perforatum,  cui  cum 
posueris  aliquid  parvum  limandum,  comprime  fortiter,  et 
mitte  gracilem  caudam  in  quod  foramen  volueris.  Item  for- 
cipes parvuli,  in  una  summitate  sibi  adhaerentes,  et  in  altera 
graciles,  quibus  grana  et  alia  quseque  minuta  componantur. 
Item  forcipes,  qui  dicuntur  carbonarii,  et  majores  et  minores, 
quae  sint  in  una  summitate  integri  et  plicati,  in  altera  aperti  et 
modice  curvi.  Item  forcipes  incisorii  majores  et  minores,  in 
duabus  partibus  compositi  et  clavo  confixi. 


CAPUT  VIII. 

DE  FERRIS  PER  QU^  FILA  TRAHUNTUR. 

FERRI  duo  latitudine  trium  digitorum,  superius  et  inferius  . 
stricti,  per  omnia  tenues,  et  tribus  ordinibus  aut  quatuor 
perforati,  per  quae  foramina  fila  trahantur. 


TRANSLATION. 


215 


CHAPTER  VL 

OF  HAMMERS. 

Many  hammers,  large,  middling  and  small,  at  one  end  flat, 
at  the  other  narrow.  Also  long  and  slender  hammers  round 
at  the  end,  large  and  small.  Also  hammers  horned  at  the 
top,  wide  at  the  bottom. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

OF  PINCERS. 

Strong  hand  pincers,  having  knobs  at  the  top,  large  and  smaller. 
Also  long  and  slender  pincers.  Also  founders'  pincers,  long 
and  shghtly  curved  at  the  upper  end.  Also  pincers  of  mode- 
rate size,  with  which  any  things  to  be  filed  are  held,  which 
must  be  slender  at  the  top  of  one  of  the  branches,  and  at  the 
other  must  hang  a  thin  and  broad  piece  of  iron,  and  perfo- 
rated, in  which  when  you  place  any  thing  small  for  filing 
you  press  strongly,  and  place  the  slender  branch  in  any 
opening  you  please.  Also  very  small  pincers  united  to- 
gether at  one  extremity  and  slender  at  the  other,  with  which 
beads  and  other  minute  things  are  arranged  together.  Also 
pincers  which  are  called  coal-pincers,  both  large  and  small, 
which  must  be  entire  and  bent  at  one  end,  open  and  slightly 
curved  at  the  other.  Also  cutting  pincers,  large  and  small, 
made  in  two  parts,  and  fastened  together  by  a  rivet. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

OF  THE  INSTRUMENTS  THROUGH  WHICH  WIRES  ARE  DRAWN. 

Two  irons  three  fingers  in  breadth,  narrow  above  and  below, 
everywhere  thin,  and  perforated  with  three  or  four  ranges, 
through  which  holes  the  wires  are  drawn. 


216 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


217 


CHAPTER  IX. 

OF  THE  INSTRUMENT  WHICH  IS  CALLED  THE  ORGANARIUM. 

There  is  also  an  iron  instrument  called  the  organarium, 
which  consists  of  two  irons,  an  under  and  upper;  but  the 
lower  part  has  the  size  and  length  of  the  middle  finger,  and 
is  somewhat  slender,  having  two  points  to  which  wood  is  fixed 
below,  over  which,  at  the  upper  part,  protrude  two  long  nails, 
which  receive  the  upper  part  of  the  instrument ;  this  iron  has 
the  size  and  length  of  the  one  underneath,  and  has  two  per- 
forations through  which  the  two  lower  ^  nails  may  be  con- 
ducted, that  they  (the  irons)  may  be  joined  together.  They 
should  also  be  well  joined  together  with  the  file,  and  in  both 
of  them  small  grooves  should  be  hollowed  out,  so  that  the 
holes  may  appear  through  the  middle,  so  that  when  silver  or 
gold,  smoothly  beaten  long  and  round,  is  placed  in  the  larger 
(groove),  the  upper  part  of  the  instrument  is  strongly  struck 
with  the  horned  hammer,  and  the  gold  or  silver  is  turned 
round  with  the  other  hand,  and  round  beads  like  beans  are 
made  ;  in  the  next  furrow  they  are  made  like  peas,  in  the 
third  like  lentils,  and  so  on  smaller. 


CHAPTER  X. 

OF  FILES  HOLLOWED  UNDERNEATH. 

Slender  irons  are  also  made  like  straws,  a  finger  in  length, 
rectangular,  but  on  one  side  wider,  the  ends  of  which,  upon 
which  the  handles  are  placed,  are  curved  upwards ;  but  un- 
derneath, lengthwise,  a  groove  is  traced,  and  is  filed  like  a 
furrow,  and  on  both  sides  of  it  sharp  ribs  are  filed.  With 
these  instruments  golden  and  silver  wires,  thick  and  fine,  are 
filed,  so  that  beads  may  appear  upon  them. 

•  The  manuscript  has  "  super  lores,"  "  upper ; "  this  is  evidently  an  inadvertence. 
Transl. 


218 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


219 


CHAPTER  XI. 

OF  SCULPING  INSTRUMENTS. 

Sculping  irons  are  also  made  for  hollowing  out  in  this 
manner.  An  instrument  is  made  from  pure  steel,  the  length 
of  the  great  finger,  and  as  thick  as  a  straw,  but  thicker  in  the 
middle  and  square.  One  end  is  placed  in  a  handle,  and  at 
the  other  end  one  side  must  be  filed  from  the  upper  to  the 
lower  angle ;  but  the  lower,  which  is  filed  slender  towards  the 
point,  is  longer;  this  being  heated,  is  tempered  in  water. 
Many  larger  and  smaller  are  made  after  this  fashion.  Another 
like  kind  is  made  square,  but  more  broad  and  thin,  and  its 
edge  is  parallel  with  the  breadth,  so  that  two  angles  are 
above,  and  the  two  below  more  long  and  equal.  In  this 
fashion  also  many  large  and  small  are  made.  A  round  and 
thick  iron  like  a  straw  is  also  made,  the  point  of  which  is 
filed  so  that  the  mark  which  it  makes  be  round. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

OF  SCRAPING  INSTRUMENTS. 

Slender  scraping  irons  are  likewise  made,  but  somewhat 
broad  at  the  end,  sharp  on  one  side,  large  and  small,  of  which 
some  are  made  curved  back  at  will,  according  to  the  mode  of 
work.  They  make  also  instruments  formed  in  the  same 
manner,  but  blunt,  for  polishing  the  work. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

OF  instruments  FIT  FOR  MALLEABLE  WORK. 

Instruments  also  are  made  for  portraying  figures,  birds, 
animals,  or  flowers  beaten  in  gold,  and  silver,  and  copper ; 
thees  are  a  palm  in  length,  wide  and  headed  at  the  upper 


220 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


graciles,  rotundi,  tenues,  trianguli,  quadranguli,  recurvi, 
prout  expetit  varietas  operis  formati,  qui  malleo  debent  per- 
cuti.  Fit  vero  ferrum  eodem  modo  formatum,  sed  gracile  in 
fine,  in  quo  est  foramen  altero  ferro  graciliore  inditum,  et  in 
circuitu  limatum,  quod  cum  percussum  fuerit  in  auro  vel 
argento  sive  cupro  deaurato,  apparet  quasi  subtilissimus 
circulus. 


CAPUT  XIV. 

DE  FERRIS  INCISORIIS. 

FIUNT  quoque  ferri  incisorii  talis  magnitudinis,  ut  plena 
manu  teneantur,  et  super  manum  emineant,  lati  et  sequales, 
inferius  etiam  manum  excedant,  lati,  tenues  et  acuti»  Horum 
fiunt  multi  parvi  et  magni,  quibus  inciditur  aurum  et  argen- 
tum  sive  cuprum  spissum. 


CAPUT  XV. 

DE  FERRIS  AD   FACIENDOS  CLAVOS. 

SUNT  et  ferri  tenues  et  stricti  perforati,  in  quibus  clavi 
capitantur,  magni,  mediocres  et  parvi. 


CAPUT  XVI. 

DE  FERRIS  INFUSORIIS. 

SUNT  etiam  ferri  infusorii,  longi,  rotundi  et  quadri,  in 
quibus  funditur  liquefactum  aurum,  argentum  vel  cuprum. 
Sunt  et  circini  ferrei  duabus  partibus  compositi,  majores  et 
minores,  recti  et  curvi. 


TRANSLATION. 


221 


part,  but  at  the  lower  end  slender,  round,  thin,  triangular, 
quadrangular,  curved  back,  as  the  variety  of  form  of  the  work 
demands  ;  these  should  be  struck  with  the  hammer.  An  iron 
is  also  made  formed  in  the  same  manner,  but  fine  at  the  end, 
in  which  a  hole  is  inserted  by  another  more  pointed  instru- 
ment and  filed  around,  which,  when  it  has  been  struck  upon 
gold,  or  silver,  or  copper  gilt,  causes  a  very  delicate  circle  to 
appear. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

OF  CUTTING  INSTRUMENTS. 

Cutting  instruments  are  also  made  broad  and  even,  of  such 
a  size  that  they  may  be  held  in  the  whole  hand,  and  that  they 
may  rise  above  the  hand  :  they  even  extend  below  the  hand 
broad,  thin  and  sharp.  Many  of  these  are  made  large  and 
small ;  with  these  gold  is  cut,  and  silver,  or  thick  copper. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

OF   IRONS   FOR  MAKING  NAILS. 

There  are  also  irons  thin  and  pierced  narrowly,  in  which 
nails  are  headed,  large,  middling  and  small. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

OF  IRON  MOULDS. 

There  are  likewise  moulds  of  iron,  long,  round  and  square, 
into  which  melted  gold,  silver,  or  copper  is  poured.  There 
are  also  iron  compasses  made  in  two  parts,  large  and  small, 
straight  and  curved. 


222 


THEOPHTLT   LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  XVII. 

DE  LIMIS. 

LIM7E  vero  fiunt  ex  puio  calibe,  magnae  et  mediocres*, 
triiim  costarum  et  rotundse.  Fiunt  et  alise,  ut  fortiores 
sint  in  medio,  interius  ex  molli  ferro,  exterius  vero  co-operi- 
untur  calibe.  Quse  cum  percussae  fuerint  secundum  magni- 
tudinem,  quam  eis  auctor  earum  dare  voluerit,  sequantur  super 
runcinam,  sicque  inciduntur  cum  malleo  ex  utraque  parte 
acuto.  Inciduntur  etiam  alise  cum  ferro  incisorio,  de  quo 
supra  diximus ;  cum  quibus  aequari  debet  opus,  quod  cum 
aliis  grossioribus  prselimatum  fuerit.  Cumque  ex  omni  parte 
incisae  fuerint,  fac  temperamentum  hoc  modo. 


CAPUT  XVIIL 

DE  TEMPERAMENTO  LIMARUM. 

COMBURE  cornu  bovis  in  igne  et  rade,  atque  misce  ei 
tertiam  partem  salis,  et  tere  fortiter.  Deinde  mitte 
limam  in  ignem,  et  cum  canduerit,  salies  illam  confectionem 
super  eam  ex  omni  parte,  aptisque  carbonibus  valde  ardent- 
ibus  cum  festinatione  sufflabis  per  omnia  sic  ut  temperamen- 
tum non  cadat,  et  statim  eiciens^  siccabis  modice  super  ignem. 
Hoc  modo  temperabis  omnes  quae  sunt  ex  calibe. 


CAPUT  XIX. 

ITEM   UNDE  SUPRA. 

FACIES  et  parvulas  similiter  quadras'^,  rotundas,  triangulas, 
tenues  ex  molli  ferro,  easque  sic  temperabis.    Cum  incisae 

'  "  ut  quadrse,"  ex  MS.  Guelph. 

*  "  extingue  aequaliter  in  aqua  et  inde  eiciens,"  ex  Codice  Guelph. 
'  "  semirotundas,"  ex  Cod.  Guelph, 


TRANSLATION. 


223 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

OF  FILES. 

Files  are  made  from  pure  steel,  large  and  moderately  sized, 
triangular  and  round.  Others  also  are  made  which  are 
stronger  in  the  middle,  from  soft  iron  inside,  but  outwardly 
they  are  covered  with  steel;  which,  when  they  have  been 
beaten  to  the  size  which  the  maker  wishes  to  give  them,  are 
made  smooth  upon  a  planing  instrument,  and  are  thus  marked 
out  with  a  hammer,  which  is  sharp  on  both  sides.  They  are 
also  marked  out  with  the  cutting  iron,  of  which  we  have 
spoken  above,  with  which  the  work,  which  has  previously 
been  filed  with  the  other  larger  irons,  should  be  smoothed. 
And  when  they  have  been  cut  all  over,  make  their  tempering 
in  this  way. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

OF  TEMPERING  FILES. 

Burn  the  horn  of  an  ox  in  the  fire,  and  scrape  it,  and  mix 
with  it  a  third  part  salt,  and  grind  it  strongly.  Then  put  the 
file  in  the  fire,  and  when  it  glows  sprinkle  this  preparation 
over  it  everywhere,  and,  some  hot  coals  being  applied,  you 
will  blow  quickly  upon  the  whole,  yet  so  that  the  tempering 
may  not  fall  off,  and  quickly  withdrawing  it\  extinguish  it 
equally  in  water,  and  taking  it  out,  dry  it  slightly  over  the 
fire.  You  will  in  this  manner  temper  all  things  which  are 
made  of  steel. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE  SAME  AS  THE  PRECEDING. 

Make  also  smaller  files,  similarly  square,  round,  triangular, 
thin,  from  soft  iron,  and  you  will  thus  temper  them.  When 

^  From  the  Wolfenhuttel  Manuscript. 


224 


THEOPHTLI    LIBER  III. 


fuerint  cum  malleolo,  sive  cum  incisorio  ferro,  aut  cum  cul- 
tello,  unges  eas  veteri  aruina  porci,  et  circumdabis  corrigiolis 
ex  hircino  corio  incisis,  ligabisque  filo  lineo.  Posthsec  co- 
operies  eas  argilla  macerata  singulariter,  caudasque  nudas 
dimittes.  Cumque  siccatee  fuerint,  mittes  in  ignem,  et  suffla- 
bis  fortiter,  combureturque  corium,  et  cum  festinatione  extra- 
hens  ab  argilla  extingues,  aequaliter  in  aqua,  extractasque  sic- 
cabis  ad  ignem. 


CAPUT  XX. 

DE  TEMPERAMENTO  FERRI. 

FERRI  quoque  fossorii  temperantur  hoc  modo.  Cum 
limati  fuerint  et  suis  manubriis  aptati,  summitas  eorum 
mittitur  in  ignem,  et  mox  ut  coeperit  candescere,  extrahitur  et 
in  aqua  extinguitur. 


CAPUT  XXI. 

ITEM   DE  EODEM. 

FIT  etiam  aliud  temperamentum  ferramentorum,  quibus 
vitrum  inciditur  et  molliores  lapides  hoc  modo.  Tolle 
hircum  triennem,  et  liga  eum  intus  tribus  diebus  sine  cibo, 
quarta  die  da  ei  filicem  comedere  et  nichil  aliud.  Quem  cum 
duobus  diebus  comederit,  sequenti  nocte  co-operi  eum  in 
dolio  inferius  perforate,  sub  quibus  foraminibus  pone  aliud 
vas  integrum,  in  quo  colligas  urinam  ejus.  Qua  duabus  vel 
tribus  noctibus  tali  modo  sufficienter  collecta,  emitte  hircum, 
et  in  ipsa  urina  ferramenta  tua  tempera.  In  urina  etiam  rufi 
pueri  parvuli  temperantur  ferramenta,  durius  quam  in  aqua 
simplici. 


TRANSLATION. 


225 


they  have  been  cut  out  with  the  small  hammer,  or  cutting 
iron,  or  with  a  knife,  anoint  them  with  the  grease  of  an  old 
hog,  and  bind  them  round  with  small  straps  cut  from  the  skin 
of  the  buck-goat,  and  tie  them  with  flaxen  thread.  After- 
wards cover  them  one  by  one  with  beaten  clay,  and  leave  the 
handles  bare.  And  when  they  are  dry  place  them  in  the  fire, 
and  blow  strongly,  and  the  skin  is  burned ;  and  quickly  taking 
them  from  the  clay,  extinguish  them  equally  in  water,  and, 
being  taken  out,  you  will  dry  them  at  the  fire. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

OF  TEMPERING  IRON, 

Grooving  irons  are  likewise  tempered  in  this  manner.  When 
they  have  been  filed  and  fitted  in  their  handles,  their  end  is 
placed  in  the  fire,  and  presently,  when  it  has  begun  to  glow, 
it  is  taken  out  and  quenched  in  water. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

OF  THE  SAME, 

Another  kind  of  tempering  of  iron  instruments  is  also  made 
in  this  manner,  by  which  glass  is  cut,  and  also  the  softer 
stones.  Take  a  three  year  old  buck-goat,  and  tie  him  up 
within  doors  for  three  days  without  food ;  on  the  fourth  day 
give  him  fern  to  eat  and  nothing  else.  When  he  shall  have 
eaten  this  for  two  days,  on  the  night  following  enclose  him  in 
a  cask  perforated  at  the  bottom,  under  which  holes  place  an- 
other sound  vessel  in  which  you  can  collect  his  urine.  Having 
in  this  manner  for  two  or  three  nights  sufficiently  collected  this, 
turn  out  the  buck,  and  temper  your  instruments  in  this  urine. 
Iron  instruments  are  also  tempered  in  the  urine  of  a  young 
red-haired  boy  harder  than  in  simple  water. 


226 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  XXII. 

DE  VASCULIS  AD  LIQUEFACIENDUM  AURUM  ET  ARGENTUM. 

TXiEC  omnia  prse  manibus  habens,  accipe  argillam  albam, 
et  tere  earn  minutissime,  acceptisque  vasis  veteribus 
in  quibus  aurum  vel  argentum  prius  infusum  fuerit,  com- 
minue  singulariter.  Quse  si  non  habeas,  accipe  testulas 
ollse  albee,  et  mitte  eas  in  ignem  donee  candescant,  et  si  non 
resiliunt,  sine  refrigerari  et  tere  singulariter.  Deinde  pone 
duas  partes  argillae  tritse  et^  quartam  coctse  testae,  et  com- 
misceas  cum  aqua  tepida,  macera  fortiter,  et  inde  compone 
vascula  majora  et  minora,  in  quibus  liquefacias  aurum  et 
argentum.  Interim  vero,  dum  siccantur,  accepta  statera  pon- 
dera  aurum  vel  argentum,  quod  operari  volueris.  Quod  si 
argentum  purum  non  fuerit,  hoc  modo  purifica. 


CAPUT  XXIIL 

DE  PURIFICANDO  ARGENTO. 

CRIBRA  cineres,  commiscens  eos  aqua,  et  accipe  testam 
oll'de  in  igne  probatam,  quae  tantee  magnitudinis  sit,  in 
qua  credas  argentum  liquefieri  posse,  quod  purificari  debet, 
ut  non  effundatur,  et  mitte  cineres  in  eam,  in  medio  tenues  et 
circa  oram  spissos,  et  sicca  ad  carbones.  Qua  siccata  amove 
carbones  a  fornace  modicum,  et  pone  ipsam  cum  cineribus  sub 
foramine  ante  fornacem,  sic  ut  ventus  ex  folle  in  eam  flet, 
superpositisque  carbonibus  suffla  donee  candescat.  Deinde 
mitte  argentum  in  eam,  et  superpone  modicum  plumbi,  super- 
jectisque  carbonibus  liquefac  illud,  et  habeas  juxta  te  virgam 
ex  sepe  vento  siccatam,  cum  qua  discooperies  diligenter,  et 


•  "  tertiam/'     MS.  Quelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


227 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

OF  CRUCIBLES  FOR  MELTING  GOLD  AND  SILVER. 

Having  all  these  things  ready  to  your  hands,  take  white  clay 
and  grind  it  very  fine,  and  old  vases,  in  which  gold  or  silver  has 
been  before  melted  ;  being  taken,  break  them  up  separately. 
If  you  have  not  these,  take  baked  fragments  of  white  earthen 
pots,  and  put  them  in  the  fire  until  they  glow,  and  if  they  do 
not  crack  allow  them  to  cool  and  grind  them  apart.  Then 
put  two  parts  of  the  ground  clay  and  a  fourth*  part  of  the 
burnt  pot  fragments,  and  mix  it  with  warm  water,  beat  it 
strongly,  and  make  crucibles  large  and  small  of  it,  in  which 
you  can  melt  gold  and  silver.  And  in  the  mean  time,  while 
they  are  drying,  taking  the  balance,  weigh  the  gold  or  silver 
which  you  wish  to  be  worked.  But  if  the  silver  be  not  pure, 
purify  it  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

OF  PURIFYING  SILVER. 

Sift  ashes,  mixing  them  with  water,  and  take  an  earthen 
vessel  proved  in  the  fire,  which  must  be  of  such  a  size  as  you 
think  the  silver,  which  is  to  be  purified,  can  be  melted  in, 
so  that  it  may  not  be  scattered,  and  put  the  ashes  into  it, 
slightly  in  the  middle,  but  thick  round  the  border,  and  dry  it 
upon  the  coals.  Being  dry,  remove  the  coals  a  little  from 
the  furnace,  and  place  it  with  the  ashes  under  the  opening 
before  the  furnace,  so  that  the  wind  from  the  bellows  may 
flow  into  it,  and  the  coals  being  placed  over  it,  blow  until 
it  glows.  Then  place  the  silver  in  it,  and  superpose  a  little 
lead,  and,  the  coals  being  heaped  over  it,  melt  it,  and  have 
near  you  a  rod  cut  from  the  hedge  and  dried  in  the  wind,  with 

'  "  a  third/'  in  the  Wol/enbilUel  MS. 

Q  2 


228 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


229 


which  you  will  carefully  uncover  it,  and  will  cleanse  from  the 
silver  whatever  impurity  you  may  see  upon  it ;  and  placing  a 
fire-brand  upon  it,  that  is,  wood  burnt  in  the  fire,  you  will  blowr 
moderately  upon  it  with  a  long  stroke.  And  when  you  have 
cast  out  all  the  lead  by  this  process,  if  you  see  that  the  silver 
is  not  yet  pure,  again  add  lead,  and  the  coals  being  super- 
posed, do  as  before.  But  if  you  see  the  silver  boil  up  and  fly 
out,  know  that  tin  or  brass  is  mixed  with  it ;  and  break  up 
a  small  piece  of  glass  very  finely,  and  throw  it  upon  the  silver 
and  add  lead  ;  the  coals  being  superposed,  blow  strongly. 
Then  examine  it  as  before,  and  with  the  rod  remove  the  im- 
purity of  glass  and  lead,  and  the  charcoal  being  placed  upon 
it,  do  as  before,  and  this  until  at  length  it  is  made  pure. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

OF  THE  DIVISION   OF  THE  SILVER  FOR  THE  WORK. 

This  being  purified,  if  you  wish  to  fabricate  a  chalice,  divide 
the  silver  equally  in  two,  and  keep  one  half  for  making  the 
foot  and  the  plate;  from  the  other  you  make  the  cup,  to 
which  you  add  a  portion  from  the  part  of  the  plate ;  for  ex- 
ample, if  there  be  a  mark  of  silver,  add  to  the  half  the  weight 
of  twelve  nummi,  which  you  will  afterwards  file  and  scrape, 
that  you  may  give  it  to  its  portion.  But  should  there  be  more 
or  less  silver,  you  add,  according  to  its  quantity,  and  after- 
wards you  restore  its  weight  to  each  part. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

OF  MELTING  THE  SILVER. 

These  things  thus  arranged,  put  the  silver  into  one  of  the 
small  crucibles,  and  when  it  is  liquefied  throw  a  little  salt 
upon  it,  and  directly  pour  it  into  the  round  mould,  which  is 
made  warm  over  the  fire,  and  in  which  there  is  melted  wax, 


230  THEOPHILI 

gentia  contigerit,  ut  argentum 
funde,  donee  sanum  fiat'. 


LIBER  III. 

fusum  sanum  non  sit,  iterum 


CAPUT  XXVL 

DE  FABRICANDO  MINORE  CALICE. 

CLFMQUE  coeperis  percutere,  qutere  meditullium  in  eo,  et 
fac  centrum  cum  circino,  et  circa  eum  facies  caudam 
quadram,  in  qua  pedem  configere  debes.  Cum  vero  sic  atte- 
nuatum  fuerit,  ut  manu  plicari  possit,  fac  interius  circulos  cum 
circino  a  centro  usque  in  medium,  et  exterius  a  medio  usque 
ad  Oram;  et  cum  rotund o  malleo  percute  interius  secundum 
circulos,  ut  inde  profunditatem  capiat,  et  exterius  cum  me- 
diocri  super  rotundam  incudem  secundum  circulos  usque  ad 
oram,  ut  inde  strictius  fiat ;  et  hoc  tamdiu  fac  donee  ei  formam 
et  amplitudinem  secundum  argenti  quantitatem  acquiras. 
Quo  facto  rade  interius  et  exterius  aeque  cum  lima,  et  circa 
oram,  donee  equalis  per  omnia  fiat.  Deinde  residuam  medie- 
tatem  argenti  sicut  supra  divide  in  duo,  et  ab  una  parte  aufer 
pondus  sex  nummorum,  et  adde  alteri,  in  qua  pedem  facies, 
quod  postea  inde  limando  auferes  et  suse  parti  reddes.  Sicque 
funde  et  percute  pedem  sicut  vas,  usque  dum  attenuetur,  ex- 
cepto  quod  caudam  non  facies  in  eo.  Quo  attenuato  profun- 
ditatem dabis  ei  cum  malleo  rotundo  interius  et  exterius,  in- 
cipiesque  nodum  formare  cum  mediocri  malleo  super  rotundam 
incudem,  et  inde  super  longam  ex  utraque  parte,  donee  collum 
tam  gracile  facias  sicut  volueris ;  hoc  diligenter  procurans,  ne 
plus  in  uno  loco  percutias  quam  in  altero,  rie  forte  nodus  se 
in  aliquam  partem  inclinet,  sed  in  medio  stet,  ex  omni  parte 
aeque  spissus  et  latus.    Deinde  pone  eum  super  carbones,  et 

'  "  Deinde  fac  tibi  confectionem  ex  faecibus  claris  et  sale,  in  qua  extingues  argentum 
quotiens  recoxeria."    Ex  MS.  Guelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


231 


and  if  by  some  negligence  it  should  happen  that  the  melted 
silver  be  not  whole,  cast  it  again  until  it  is  made  whole  \  [Then 
make  the  mixture  from  clear  lye  and  salt,  in  which  you 
quench  the  silver  as  often  as  you  remelt  it.] 


CHAPTER  XXVL 

OF  MAKING  THE  SMALLER  CHALICE. 

And  when  you  have  begun  to  beat  it,  find  the  middle  of  it, 
and  mark  a  centre  with  the  compass,  and  around  it  make  a 
square  projection,  in  which  you  should  fasten  the  foot.  But 
when  it  has  been  made  so  thin  that  it  can  be  bent  with  the 
hand,  make  circles  inside  with  the  compass  from  the  centre 
to  the  middle,  and  outside,  from  the  middle  to  the  rim,  and 
with  a  round  hammer  beat  it  inside  according  to  the  circles, 
that  thus  it  may  acquire  depth,  and  outside  with  a  middle- 
sized  (hammer)  upon  a  round  anvil  according  to  the  circles 
as  far  as  the  rim,  that  it  may  thus  become  more  narrow,  and 
do  this  until  at  length  you  attain  for  it  a  form  and  capacity 
according  to  the  quantity  of  silver.  Which  being  done,  rasp  the 
inside  and  out  smoothly  with  a  file,  and  round  the  mouth  until  it 
is  made  even  throughout.  Then  divide  the  remaining  half  of  the 
silver  in  two,  as  above,  and  from  one  portion  take  away  the 
weight  of  six  nummi,  and  add  it  to  the  other  from  which  you 
make  the  foot,  which  afterwards  in  filing  you  will  take  away 
from  it  and  restore  to  its  portion.  And  thus  cast  and  hammer 
the  foot,  as  the  cup,  until  it  is  at  length  thinned,  excepting  that 
you  do  not  make  a  projection  in  it.  Being  thinned  you  will 
give  it  depth,  inside  and  out,  with  the  round  hammer,  and  will 
begin  to  form  the  knot  with  the  middle-sized  hammer  upon 
the  round  anvil,  and  then  upon  one  lengthened  upon  both  sides, 
until  you  make  the  neck  as  slender  as  you  wish,  having  a 
careful  regard  to  this,  that  you  do  not  hammer  more  in  one 
place  than  in  another,  that  the  knot  may  not  by  chance  lean 
upon  either  side,  but  stand  in  the  middle,  everywhere  equally 
thick  and  wide.    Then  place  it  upon  the  coals  and  fill  it  with 

*  From  ike  Wolfenhuttel  MS. 


232 


THEOPHILT   LIBER  III. 


imple  cera,  et  cum  refrigerata  fuerit,  tene  ipsum  pedem  in 
sinistra  manu,  et  in  dextera  ferrum  unum  ductile  ac  tenue ; 
et  fac  puerum  sedere  juxta  te,  qui  percutiat  cum  parvulo 
malleo  super  ferrum  in  quocunque  loco  illud  posueris,  et  inde 
designabis  anulum,  qui  inter  nodum  et  pedem  in  circuitu  esse 
debet.  Quo  designato  efFunde  ceram  et  recocto  pede  iterum 
imple,  ut  anulum  profundius  percutias  sicut  prius ;  sicque  facies 
donee  eum  sequaliter  cum  suis  granis  perficias.  Deinde  lima 
nodum  et  rade,  et  circa  pedem  interius  et  exterius,  et  oram 
ejus;  sicque  facies  in  medio  nodi  foramen  quadrangulum 
secundum  quantitatem  caudae  superioris  vasis,  et  in  eo  pones 
spissam  partem  argenti,  rotundam,  eodem  modo  perforatam. 
Facies  quoque  anulum  singulariter,  qui  stare  debet  inter  nodum 
et  vas  superius,  eadem  quantitate  et  specie  sicut  est  ille,  quem 
ductili  ferro  formasti  sub  nodo,  et  accipiens  ferrum  obtusum 
fricabis  super  cotem  sequalem,  deinde  super  ligneum  querci- 
neum,  imposito  ei  carbone  trito,  et  cum  eo  polies  ipsum  vas 
interius  et  exterius,  nodum  et  pedem  et  anulum,  sicque  frica- 
bis cum  panno  et  creta  subtiliter  rasa,  donee  omnino  lucidum 
fiat  opus.  His  ita  peractis  finde  caudam  vasis  in  quatuor 
usque  in  medium  cum  lima  tenue,  et  e versa  eum  super  incudem 
rotundam  ita  ut  sequaliter  pendeat,  et  superpone  ei  anulum,  et 
in  foramine  nodi  caudam,  particulasque  quae  in  est  desuper  et 
tenens  haec  cum  sinistra  manu  fortiter  et  sequaliter,  et  in  dex- 
tera ferrum  ductile  mitte  in  nodum  et  fac  superius  percuti  cum 
malleo  mediocri  donee  configas  firmiter.  Postea  funde  argen- 
tum,  quod  limasti  et  rasisti  cum  eo  quod  residuum  est,  et  per- 
cute  rotulam  cum  circino  aequatam  tantse  latitudinis  quanta  est 
altitudo  calicis  a  pede  inferius  usque  ad  oram  superius,  et 
modice  amplius,  et  sic  percute  cavum  interius  secundum  lati- 
tudinem  vasis  superius,  ita  ut  sequaliter  possit  in  eo  jacere. 
Et  si  volueris,  fac  circulos  duos  interius  cum  circino,  et  per- 


TRANSLATION. 


233 


wax,  and  when  it  has  become  cold,  hold  the  foot  itself 
in  the  left  hand,  and  in  the  right  an  iron,  yielding  and  thin, 
and  make  the  boy  sit  near  you,  who  can  strike  with  a  very 
small  hammer  upon  the  iron  in  whatever  spot  you  place  it, 
and  you  will  mark  the  ring  with  it,  which  should  be  around 
it  between  the  knot  and  the  foot.  Being  designed,  pour 
out  the  wax,  and  the  foot  being  warmed  fill  it  again,  so  that 
you  may  hammer  the  ring  more  deeply  than  before ;  and  act 
thus  until  you  perfect  it  equally,  with  its  beads.  Then  file 
and  scrape  the  knot,  and  around  the  foot  inside  and  out,  and 
its  brim ;  and  make,  in  the  middle  of  the  knob,  a  quadrangular 
opening  according  to  the  size  of  the  projection  in  the  upper 
vase,  and  place  in  it  a  thick  piece  of  silver,  round,  perforated 
in  the  same  manner.  Make  likewise  a  ring  separately,  which 
ought  to  stand  between  the  knob  and  the  vase  above,  of  the 
same  size  and  kind  as  that  which  you  had  formed  under  the 
knob  with  the  ductile  iron,  and  taking  a  blunted  iron  you 
will  rub  it  upon  a  flat  stone,  then  upon  oak-wood,  ground 
charcoal  being  placed  upon  it,  and  with  it  you  will  polish  the 
vase  inside  and  out,  the  knob  and  foot  and  the  ring,  and  you 
will  thus  rub  it  with  a  cloth  and  chalk  finely  scraped,  until 
the  work  be  made  quite  brilHant.  These  things  being  thus 
accomplished,  divide  the  projection  of  the  cup  into  four,  as  far 
as  the  middle,  with  a  thin  file,  and  turn  it  over  upon  a  round 
anvil,  so  that  it  may  hang  equally,  and  place  the  ring  upon  it, 
and  the  projection  in  the  opening  of  the  knob,  and  the  small 
pieces  which  are  from  above,  and  holding  these  with  the  left 
hand  firmly  and  evenly,  and  in  the  right  the  ductile  iron,  place 
them  in  the  knob,  and  cause  it  to  be  beaten  with  the  middle- 
sized  hammer  until  you  fasten  it  firmly.  Afterwards  melt  the 
silver  which  you  have  filed  and  scraped  with  that  which  is 
left,  and  strike  out  a  round  flat  plate  with  the  compass,  as 
large  as  is  the  height  of  the  chalice  from  the  foot  below  to 
the  mouth  above,  and  rather  more,  and  beat  it  hollow  within 
according  to  the  breadth  of  the  vase  at  the  top,  so  that  it  can 
lie  evenly  upon  it.    And,  if  you  wish,  draw  two  circles  within, 


234 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


235 


with  the  compass,  and  portray  with  a  blunted  graver  the 
Hkeness  of  a  lamb  in  the  middle,  or  a  right  hand  as  if  de- 
scending from  heaven  and  blessing,  and  letters  between  these 
two  circles,  and  hollow  it  finely  with  the  sculpturing  iron, 
poHshing  it  effectively,  as  the  chalice. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

OF  THE  LARGER  CHALICE  AND  ITS  MOULD. 

But  if  you  wish  to  construct  a  large  silver  chalice,  of  four,  or 
six,  or  ten  marks,  you  will  first  purify  and  prove  all  the  silver 
in  the  fire ;  afterwards  divide  it  in  the  order  above.  After  this 
take  two  pieces  of  iron  equally  long  and  wide,  of  the  measure 
of  a  palm  and  thick  as  a  straw,  evenly  beaten  and  without 
flaw,  and  carefully  smoothed  with  a  plane :  make  between 
these  an  iron  binding  beaten  smoothly  and  moderately 
thick,  which  you  will  bend  in  fashion  of  a  circle,  of  such  size 
as  it  may  be  apparent  to  you  that  it  can  be  filled  with  the 
silver  which  you  wish  to  cast  in  it.  And  when  you  have  bent 
it,  do  not  join  the  ends  together,  but  you  will  separate  them 
a  little  that  an  opening  may  appear  through  which  you  can 
pour  in.  You  will  adapt  this  circle  equally  between  the  two 
iron  (plates),  so  that  its  ends  may  appear  a  Httle  beyond  the 
irons,  and  bind  these  with  three  strong  iron  hooks  in  three 
places,  namely,  below  and  on  each  side  near  the  opening,  and 
thus  plaster  beaten  clay  around  the  circle  between  the  irons 
and  abundantly  about  the  opening.  When  this  mould  has 
become  dry,  you  warm  it  and  pour  in  the  melted  silver.  All 
gold  and  silver,  which  is  founded  in  this  manner,  is  always 
sound,  (unless  it  happen  through  great  negligence,)  for  working 
in  it  whatever  you  may  wish.  You  will  measure  the  circles 
also  according  to  the  quantity  which  you  wish  to  found,  and 
you  make  larger  and  smaller  :  after  you  have  beaten  out  the 
melted  silver  as  above,  fill  it  with  wax  and  beat  it  on  the 
body,  if  you  wish  to  have  ribs  flat  or  round ;  these  stand 
around  hke  small  spoons,  both  which  kinds  of  work  give 
great  ornament  to  the  chalice. 


236 


THEOPHILT   LIBER  III. 


costas  si  volueris  cum  nigello  parare,  hoc  procura  ut  argen- 
tum  spissius  sit,  et  sic  age  ut  una  costa  deauretur  et  altera 
denigretur,  quas  semper  oportet  pares  esse.  Quas  cum 
percusseris,  lima  aequaliter  et  rade,  et  in  illis  quas  deni- 
grare  vis,  pertrahe  greeca  folia  et  fode  grosso  tractu,  cam- 
posque  eorum  fodies  gracilibus  circulis  et  subtili  opere,  deinde 
compone  nigellum  hoc  modo. 


CAPUT  XXVIIL 

DE  NIGELLO. 

ACCIPE  argentum  purum,  et  aequo  pondere  divide  in 
duo,  ad  dens  ei  tertiam  partem  cupri  puri.  Quas  tres 
partes,  cum  miseris  in  fusile  vasculum,  pondera  tantum 
plumbi,  quantum  appendit  medietas  ipsius  cupri,  quod  ar- 
gento  miscuisti,  acceptumque  sulphur  croceum  frange  minu- 
tatim,  et  mitte  plumbum  et  partem  ipsius  sulphuris  super 
vasculum  cupreum,  ac  reliquum  sulphuris  mitte  in  aliud  vas 
fusile.  Cumque  liquefeceris  argentum  cum  cupro,  move  pari- 
ter  cum  carbone,  statimque  infunde  ei  plumbum  et  sulphur  ex 
cupreo  vasculo,  et  rursum  commisce  cum  carbone  fortiter,  et 
cum  festinatione  funde  in  aliud  vas  fusile  super  sulphur  quod 
in  eo  miseras,  moxque  deposito  vasculo,  cum  quo  fuderas, 
accipe  illud  in  quod  fudisti,  et  mitte  in  ignem  donee  liquefiat, 
iterumque  commovens  funde  in  ferrum  infusorium.  Quod 
prius  quam  frigescat,  percute  modicum,  et  calefac  parum, 
rursumque  percute,  sicque  facies  donee  omnino  adtenuetur. 
Natura  enim  nigelli  talis  est,  ut  si  frigidum  percutitur,  statim 
frangitur  et  resilit,  nec  debet  sic  calefieri,  ut  rubescat,  quia 
statim  hquescit  et  fluit  in  cineres.  Adtenuatum  vero  nigellum 
mitte  in  vasculum  profundum  et  spissum,  et  superfundens 
aquam,  confringe  cum  malleo  rotundo,  donee  minutissimum 


TRANSLATION. 


237 


If  you  wish  to  ornament  which  ribs  with  niello,  take  heed 
of  this,  that  the  silver  be  thicker,  and  so  act  that  one  rib  may 
be  gilt  and  the  other  blackened ;  it  is  always  necessary  that 
they  should  be  in  pairs.  When  you  have  beaten  out  these,  file 
them  evenly,  and  portray  Greek  foliage  in  those  places  which 
you  wish  to  make  black,  and  carve  with  a  bold  stroke,  and 
you  sculpture  their  grounds  with  graceful  circles  and  with 
fine  work  ;  then  compose  the  niello  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

OF  NIELLO. 

Take  pure  silver,  and  divide  it  into  two  equal  weights,  add- 
ing to  it  a  third  part  of  pure  copper.  When  you  have  placed 
these  three  quantities  into  a  cast  metal  cup,  weigh  as  much 
lead  as  the  half  of  the  copper  which  you  have  mixed  with 
the  silver  weighs,  and  taking  yellow  sulphur  break  it  very 
small,  and  put  the  lead  and  part  of  this  sulphur  upon  a  small 
copper  vessel,  and  place  the  rest  of  the  sulphur  in  another 
cast  metal  cup.  And  when  you  have  liquefied  the  silver  with 
the  copper,  stir  it  evenly  with  charcoal,  and  instantly  pour  into 
it  the  lead  and  sulphur  from  the  small  copper  cup,  and  again 
mix  it  well  together  with  the  charcoal,  and  with  quickness 
pour  it  into  the  other  molten  cup  upon  the  sulphur  which  you 
had  put  into  it,  and  then  putting  down  the  small  vase  with 
which  you  have  poured  out,  take  that  into  which  you  have 
cast  it  and  place  it  in  the  fire  until  (the  contents)  liquefy,  and 
again  stirring  it  together  pour  into  the  iron  crucible.  Before 
this  cools  beat  it  a  little,  and  warm  it  a  little,  and  again  beat 
it,  and  do  thus  until  it  is  quite  thinned.  For  the  nature  of 
niello  is  such,  that  if  it  is  struck  while  cold  it  is  immediately 
broken  and  flies  to  pieces,  nor  should  it  be  made  so  warm  as 
to  glow,  because  it  instantly  liquefies  and  flows  into  the 
ashes.  The  niello  being  made  thin,  put  it  into  a  deep  and 
thick  cup,  and  pouring  water  upon  it,  break  it  up  with  a 


238 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


fiat,  ejectumque  inde  sicca,  et  quod  minutum  est  mitte  in 
pennam  anseris  atque  obstrue,  quod  vero  grossius  est,  itemm 
mitte  in  vas  et  comminue,  rursumque  siccatum  mitte  in 
alteram  pennam. 


CAPUT  XXIX. 

DE  IMPONENDO  NIGELLO. 

CUMQUEsic  plures  pennas  impleveris,  accipe  gummi,quod 
vocaturparahas^etparticulam  ejus  tere  cum  aquaineodem 
vase  ita,  ut  ex  eo  vix  aqua  turbida  fiat,  et  locum  quern  volueris 
deiiigrare  cum  ipsa  aqua  fac  humid um  prius,  accipiensque 
pennam  cum  levi  ferro  excute  tritum  nigellum  super  eum  dili- 
genter  donee  totum  cooperias,  sicque  per  omnia  facies. 
Deinde  compone  carbones  copiose  accensos,  et  in  eos  missum 
vas  diligenter  cooperi  sic,  ut  super  nigellum  nuUus  carbo  po- 
natur,  nec  cadat.  Cumque  liquefactum  fuerit,  tene  vas  cum 
forcipe,  et  verte  ex  omni  parte,  qua  fluere  videris,  et  ita  con- 
vertendo  cave  ne  in  terram  nigellum  cadat.  Quod  in  primo 
calore  non  fuerit  plenum  per  omnia,  denuo  fac  humidum,  et 
superpone  ut  prius,  et  cave  diligenter  ne  plus  opus  sit. 


CAPUT  XXX. 

DE  FUNDENDIS  AURICULIS  CALICIS. 

SI  volueris  aures  calici  apponere,  mox  ut  percusseris  et 
raseris,  priusquam  operis  aliud  in  eo  quid  facias,  accepta 
cera  forma  inde  aures,  et  sculpe  in  eis  dracones  sive  bestias 
aut  aves,  vel  folia  quomodocumque  modo  volueris.  In  sum- 
mitate  vero  utriusque  auris  pone  parum  cerae,  rotundse,  sicut 

*  "  barabas,"  in  Cod>  Gv;el;ph. 


TRANSLATION. 


239 


round  hammer  until  it  becomes  very  small,  and  taking  it  out, 
dry  it,  and  put  that  which  is  fine  into  a  goose  quill  and  close 
it  up,  but  that  which  is  coarser  place  again  in  the  vessel  and 
bruise  it,  and  being  again  dried,  put  it  into  another  quill. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

OF  APPLYING  THE  NIELLO. 

When  you  have  thus  filled  many  quills,  take  the  gum  which 
is  called  parahas  and  grind  a  small  piece  of  it  with  water  in 
the  same  vase,  so  that  the  water  is  made  scarcely  turbid  from 
it,  and  first  moisten  the  place  which  you  wish  to  blacken  with 
this  water,  and  taking  the  quill  rub  off  the  ground  niello  with 
a  light  instrument  upon  it  carefully,  until  you  have  covered 
the  whole,  and  do  this  over  the  whole.  Then  gather  exces- 
sively hot  coals,  and  placing  the  vase  in  them,  carefully  cover 
them,  so  that  no  coal  be  placed,  nor  can  fall,  over  the  niello. 
And  when  it  is  liquefied,  hold  the  vase  with  the  pincers  and 
turn  it  from  every  side  on  which  you  see  it  flow,  and  in  thus 
turning  it  round,  take  care  that  the  niello  does  not  fall  to  the 
ground.  But  should  it  not  be  completely  perfect  at  the  first 
heating,  again  moisten  it,  and  superpose  (niello)  as  before,  and 
take  great  care  that  no  further  work  is  required. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

OF  CASTING  THE  HANDLES  OF  THE  CHALICE. 

Should  you  wish  to  apply  handles  to  the  chalice,  as  soon  as 
you  have  beaten  and  filed  it,  before  you  make  any  other  work 
upon  it,  taking  wax,  form  the  handles  with  it,  and  grave  upon 
them  dragons,  or  animals,  or  birds,  or  leaves,  in  whatever 
manner  you  may  wish.  But  on  the  top  of  each  handle  place 
a  httle  wax,  round  like  a  slender  candle,  half  a  finger  in 


240 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


gracilis  candela  longitudine  minimi  digiti,  sed  in  summitate 
sit  aliquantulum  grossior,  quae  cera  vocatur  infusorium ;  quam 
solidabis  calido  ferro.  Deinde  accipe  argillam  fortiter  mace- 
ratam,  et  co-operi  diligenter  utrasque  aures  singillatim,  ita  ut 
omnia  foramina  sculpturae  impleantur.  Quae  cum  siccatae 
fuerint,  iterum  co-operi  per  omnia  aequaliter,  excepta  summi- 
tate infusorii,  et  tertio  similiter  facies.  Postmodum  mitte 
ipsas  formas  juxta  carbones,  ut  cum  calefactae  fuerint,  effundas 
ceram.  Qua  efFusa  pones  eas  omnino  in  ignem,  convertens 
foramina  per  quae  cera  exiit  inferius,  et  sine  donee  candescant 
sicut  carbones,  statimque  liquefac  argentum,  addens  ei  mo- 
dicum de  auricalco  Hyspanico,  ut  verbi  gratia,  si  fuerit  argenti 
dimidia  marca,  pondus  duorum  nummorum,  si  vero  plus  aut 
minus,  e  contra ;  et  eiciens  formas  ab  igne  siste  eas  firmiter, 
et  infunde  eodem  loco,  unde  ceram  efFudisti.  Cumque  refri- 
gerata  fuerint,  aufer  argillam,  et  cum  lima  et  ferris  fossoriis 
adjunge  eas  vasi  in  suis  locis,  et  subjuncturis  facies  duo  fora- 
mina longa,  unum  inferius  et  aliud  superius,  quae  foris  non 
appareant,  in  quibus  junges  singillatim  duos  clavos  latos,  quos 
facies  transire  vas  per  duo  foramina  ex  utraque  parte  superius 
et  inferius,  et  configes  interius  atque  solidabis  hoc  modo. 


CAPUT  XXXI. 

DE  SOLIDATURA  ARGENTI. 

PONDERA  duas  partes  argenti  puri,  et  tertiam  cupri 
rubri,  et  confunde  atque  subtiliter  lima  in  vase  mundo, 
et  mitte  in  pennam.  Deinde  tolle  vini  petram,  quae  crescit 
interius  circa  vasa,  in  quibus  optimum  vinum  diu  jacet,  et 
particulas  ejus  liga  in  panno,  et  mitte  in  ignem  ut  comburatur 
tamdiu  donee  nullus  inde  fumus  procedat.  Quo  ab  igne  le- 
vato  et  refrigerato  exsuffla  cineres  panni  et  illud  ustum  tere 
in  cupreo  vase  cum  rotundo  malleo,  admixta  aqua  et  sale  ut 


TRANSLATION. 


241 


Jengtli,  but  let  it  be  somewhat  thicker  at  the  top ;  this  wax  is 
called  the  funnel,  and  which  you  will  make  fast  with  a  hot 
iron.  Then  take  clay  well  beaten,  and  cover  carefully  both 
the  handles  one  by  one,  so  that  all  the  hollows  of  the  sculpture 
may  be  filled  up.  When  these  are  dry  again  cover  equally 
over  all,  except  the  top  of  the  funnel,  and  do  thus  a  third 
time.  Afterwards  place  these  moulds  near  the  coals,  that 
when  they  have  become  warm  you  may  pour  out  the  wax. 
Which  being  turned  out,  place  them  altogether  in  the  fire, 
turning  the  openings  through  which  the  wax  flowed  out 
downwards,  and  leave  them  until  they  glow  like  the  coals,  and 
immediately  melt  the  silver,  adding  to  it  a  little  Spanish 
brass,  as  for  example,  if  there  be  half  a  marc  of  silver,  the 
weight  of  two  nummi,  but  if  more  or  less,  accordingly;  and 
taking  out  the  moulds  from  the  fire,  support  them  firmly, 
and  cast  into  the  same  place  whence  you  poured  out  the  wax. 
And  when  they  have  become  cold  remove  the  clay,  and  with 
a  file  and  the  chisel  join  them  to  the  vase  in  their  places,  and 
under  the  joinings  make  two  long  openings,  one  below  and 
another  above,  which  must  not  appear  from  without,  in  which 
you  join  one  by  one  two  broad  nails,  which  you  make  pass 
through  the  vase  through  the  two  holes,  on  both  sides  above 
and  below,  and  fasten  them  inside,  and  solder  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

OF   THE   SOLl)ERIN(i   OF  SILVER. 

W EiGH  two  parts  of  pure  silver,  and  a  third  (part)  of  red 
copper,  and  mix  and  finely  rasp  into  a  clean  vessel,  and  put 
this  into  a  quill.  Then  take  wine-stone,  which  accumulates 
inside  about  a  vessel  in  which  the  best  wine  has  remained  for 
a  long  time,  and  tie  pieces  of  it  in  a  cloth  and  pat  it  into  the 
fire,  that  it  may  be  burned,  until  at  length  no  vapour  proceeds 
from  it.  From  which,  when  taken  from  the  fire  and  cooled,  blow 
off  the  ashes  of  the  cloth  and  grind  the  burnt  (substance)  in  a 
copper  vessel  with  a  round  mallet,  water  and  salt  being  mixed 

K 


242 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


243 


with  it  until  it  is  as  thick  as  lees ;  with  a  thin  piece  of  wood 
you  anoint  about  the  nails  inside  and  outside,  and  you 
rub  off  with  a  small  iron  the  filed  silver  over  it,  and  you 
will  thus  dry  it.  Again  paint  this  mixture  over  it  more 
thickly  than  before,  and  put  it  into  the  fire,  and  coals  being 
applied,  carefully  cover  it,  and  you  will  blow  gently  with  a 
long  breath  until  the  soldering  is  sufficiently  melted ;  with- 
drawing the  vase  from  the  fire,  and  cooling  it  slightly,  you 
will  wash  it,  and,  if  the  nails  are  firm,  it  is  well ;  but  if  not, 
do  again  to  them  as  before.  And  when  they  have  become 
firm,  file  them  off  inside  and  scrape  them  smoothly,  that  no 
one  may  be  able  to  see  in  what  place  they  have  stood,  and 
the  handles  being  set  on  outside,  again  carefully  join  them  on. 
Then  make  through  the  middle  of  the  handles  against  the 
nails  very  fine  hollows,  and  likewise  in  the  same  place  beyond 
the  nails,  into  which  you  fix  them  with  all  perfected  labour, 
so  that  no  one  may  perceive  how  they  adhere.  After  these 
things  sculpture  and  grave  these  handles  studiously  with  files 
and  iron  instruments,  and  if  you  wish  to  blacken  anything  in 
them,  act  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

ALSO   OF  LAYING   ON  THE  NIELLO. 

When  you  have  mixed  and  melted  the  niello,  take  a  portion 
of  it  and  beat  it  square,  long  and  slender.  Then  take  the 
handle  with  the  pincers  and  heat  it  in  the  fire  until  it  glows, 
and  with  another  forceps,  long  and  thin,  hold  the  niello  and 
rub  it  over  all  the  places  which  you  wish  to  make  black  until 
all  the  drawings  are  full,  and  carrying  it  away  from  the  fire 
carefully  make  it  smooth  with  a  flat  file  until  the  silver  ap- 
pear, so  that  you  can  scarcely  observe  the  traits,  and  so 
scrape  it  with  the  cutting  iron,  carefully  cut  away  the  ine- 
qualities, and  you  will  gild  what  remains.  Which  gilding  you 
compose  in  this  manner. 

R  2 


244 


THEOPHILT  LIBER  TTT. 


CAPUT  XXXIIT. 

DE  COQUENDO  AURO. 

TOLLE  aurum  qualecunque  sit,  et  percute  donee  tenues 
laminae  fiant,  latitudine  trium  digitorum  et  longitudine 
quantum  possis.  Deinde  incide  partes  ut  seque  longae  et 
latse  sint,  et  conjunge  eas  pariter  atque  perfora  per  omnia 
cum  rasorio  ferro  tenui.  Postea  accipe  duas  testas  ollse  igne 
probatas  tantse  magnitudinis  ut  aurum  in  eis  possit  jacere,  et 
frange  tegulam  minutatim,  sive  argillam  fornacis  arsam  et 
rubicundam,  comminutam  pondera  in  duas  partes  agqua- 
les,  et  adde  ei  tertiam  partem  salis  eodem  pondere,  quae 
modice  aspersa  cum  urina  commisceatur  ita,  ut  non  adhae- 
reant  sibi,  sed  vix  madida  sint,  et  mitte  inde  parum  super 
unam  testam  juxta  latitudinem  auri,  deinde  ipsius  auri  unam 
partem,  rursumque  confectionem,  et  iterum  aurum  quod 
semper  confectione  ita  cooperiatur,  ne  aurum  auro  tangatur, 
sicque  imple  testam  usque  ad  summum,  et  desuper  cooperi 
cum  altera  testa,  quas  diligenter  circumlinie^  argilla  mixta  et 
macerata,  ponesque  ad  ignem,  ut  siccetur.  Interim  compone 
furnum  ex  lapidibus  et  argilla,  altitudine  duorum  pedum,  et 
latitudine  pedis  et  dimidii,  inferius  latum,  superius  vero 
strictum,  ubi  foramen  sit  in  medio,  in  quo  eminebunt  tres 
lapides  longiores  et  duri,  qui  possint  flammam  diu  sustinere, 
super  quos  pones  testas  cum  auro,  et  cooperies  aliis  testis 
abundanter.  Deinde  suppone  ignem  et  ligna,  et  cave  ne 
deficiat  ignis  copiosus  per  spatium  diei  ac  noctis.  Mane  vero 
eiciens  aurum,  rursum  f'unde,  percute  et  impone  furno  sicut 
prius.  Iterum  autem  post  diem  noctem  aufer,  et  admiscens  ei 
modicum  cupri,  funde  sicut  prius,  et  repone  super  furnum. 
Cumque  tertio  deposueris,  lava  diligenter  et  sicca;  sicque 
ponderans  vide  quantum  desit,  deinde  complica  et  serva. 


TRANSLATION. 


245 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

OF  HEATING  THE  GOLD. 

Take  gold,  of  whatsoever  sort  it  may  be,  and  beat  it  until  thin 
leaves  are  made  in  breadth  three  fingers,  and  as  long  as 
you  can.  Then  cut  out  pieces  that  are  equally  long  and  wide, 
and  join  them  together  equally,  and  perforate  through  all  with 
a  fine  cutting  iron.  Afterwards  take  two  earthen  pots  proved 
in  the  fire,  of  such  a  size  that  the  gold  can  lie  flat  in  them, 
and  break  a  tile  very  small,  or  clay  of  the  furnace  burned  and 
red,  weigh  it,  powdered,  into  two  equal  parts,  and  add  to  it  a 
third  part  salt  for  the  same  weight ;  which  things  being  slightly 
sprinkled  with  urine,  are  mixed  together  so  that  they  may  not  ad- 
here together,  but  are  scarcely  wetted,  and  put  a  little  of  it  upon 
a  pot  about  the  breadth  of  the  gold,  then  a  piece  of  the  gold 
itself,  and  again  the  composition,  and  again  the  gold,  which 
in  the  digestion  is  thus  always  covered,  that  gold  may  not  be 
in  contact  with  gold ;  and  thus  fill  the  pot  to  the  top,  and 
cover  it  above  with  another  pot,  which  you  carefully  lute 
round  with  clay,  mixed  and  beaten,  and  you  place  it  over  the 
fire,  that  it  may  be  dried.  In  the  mean  time  compose  a  fur- 
nace from  stones  and  clay,  two  feet  in  height,  and  a  foot  and 
a  half  in  breadth,  wide  at  the  bottom,  but  narrow  at  the  top, 
where  there  is  an  opening  in  the  middle,  in  which  project 
three  long  and  hard  stones,  which  may  be  able  to  sustain  the 
flame  for  a  long  time,  upon  which  you  place  the  pots  with 
the  gold,  and  cover  them  with  other  tiles  in  abundance.  Then 
supply  fire  and  wood,  and  take  care  that  a  copious  fire  is  not 
wanting  for  the  space  of  a  day  and  night.  In  the  morning, 
taking  out  the  gold,  again  melt,  beat  and  place  it  in  the  fur- 
nace as  before.  Again  also,  after  a  day  and  night,  take  it 
away,  and  mixing  a  little  copper  with  it,  melt  it  as  before,  and 
replace  it  upon  the  furnace.  And  when  you  have  taken  it 
away  a  third  time,  wash  and  dry  it  carefully,  and  so  weighing 
it,  see  how  much  is  wanting,  then  fold  it  up  and  keep  it. 


246 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


247 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

THE  SAME  AS  ABOVE. 

But  if  there  should  be  but  little  gold,  which  you  wish  to  di- 
gest, beat  it  and  lay  it  together  in  the  pots  as  before.  After- 
wards take  a  new  clay  pot  and  break  a  hole  in  the  bottom, 
and  four  (holes)  round  the  sides,  and  make  a  small  vase  in 
clay,  with  three  feet  so  separated  from  each  other  that  they 
can  stand  over  the  opening  which  is  in  the  bottom  of  the  pot; 
place  the  vessels  with  the  gold  upon  this  when  it  has  become 
dry,  and  you  will  elevate  the  pot  upon  three  stones  some- 
what apart  from  each  other,  and  equally  thick,  and  put  in 
some  glowing  coals,  then  some  dead  (coals),  and  thus  as 
often  as  they  are  deficient  superpose  fresh,  and  never  suffer 
the  vessels  to  be  destitute  of  fire.  But  sometimes  stir  the 
coals  with  a  small  piece  of  wood  put  through  the  opening, 
and  the  like  below,  that  the  ashes  may  come  out  and  the  air 
may  have  access.  And  act  with  the  coals  in  the  earthen  pot 
as  with  the  wood  in  the  furnace  above. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

OF  GRINDING  THE  GOLD. 

The  gold  being  fully  prepared,  if  you  wish  to  grind  it,  put 
eight  denarii^  into  a  pot,  and  weigh  eight  times  as  much 
quicksilver,  into  which  you  will  immediately  put  the  gold, 
and  rub  it  until  it  is  made  white,  and  break  them  together  very 
finely.  Take  also  a  small  vase  from  those  in  which  gold  or 
silver  is  melted,  which,  however,  should  be  thicker  than  those 
for  this  work,  and  place  it  in  the  fire  until  it  glows ;  put  like- 
wise in  the  fire  a  thin  and  curved  iron,  fixed  into  a  handle  at 
one  extremity,  but  at  the  other  having  a  round  knob,  and 
when  both  have  become  glowing,  hold  the  small  vase  with 
the  forceps  over  a  basin  wide  and  dry,  and  pour  the  quick- 

'  An  ounce  Troy ;  a  denarius  being  about  equivalent  to  a  dram  Troy,  or  a  seventh 
of  the  Roman  ounce. 


248 


THEOPHILI    LIBER  111. 


in  illud  vivum  argeiitum  cum  auro,  et  festinanter  cum  fetro 
curvo  et  candente  frica  illud  et  mole,  donee  nihil  sentias  in 
vasculo,  nisi  huniorem  ;  moxque  efFunde  in  aquam.  Ejecta 
vero  aqua  ilia,  mitte  aurum  in  manum  sinistram,  et  lava  dili- 
genter,  probans  digito,  si  bene  molitum  sit ;  et  si  est,  pone 
super  pannum  lineum  mundum,  et  jacta  hac  et  iliac,  donee 
siccetur  aqua. 


CAPUT  XXX VL 

ITEM   ALIO  MODO. 

QUOD  si  natura  auri  talis  est,  ut  sic  non  possis  molere, 
accipe  lapidem  sequalem,  et  in  medio  ejus  fac  fora- 
men latitudine  trium  digitorum  et  simili  profunditate.  Deinde 
para  tibi  lapidem  duriorem  illo,  sic  gracilem,  ut  possit  in  illo 
foramine  converti,  et  sic  longum,  ut  possit  in  lignum  figi  et 
firmari,  quod  lignum  sit  longitudine  trium  ulnarum,  et,  in  in- 
feriori  parte,  in  qua  lapis  jungend us  est,  sit  grossitudine  unius 
tybise.  Super  quem  lapidem,  altitudine  dimidii  pedis,  trans- 
foretur  ipsum  lignum,  cui  jungatur  aliud  lignum  tenue  latitu- 
dine duarum  palmarum,  in  quo  cauda  fiat,  quae  foramen  longi 
ligni  pertranseat,  superquod  tenue  lignum  ligetur  lapis  magni- 
tudine  unius  pedis,  a  quo  lapide  fiat  sursum  lignum  gracile  et 
rotunde  incisum  atque  planum,  ita  ut  inter  manus  possit  volvi. 
His  ita  compositis  pone  majorem  lapidem  in  pelvim,  sive  in 
vas  ligneum  eequale,  et  vide  ut  lapis  firmiter  jaceat,  et  vas 
firmiter  stet.  Cumque  aurum  cum  vivo  argento  in  foramen 
ejus  miseris,  et  sabuluin  desuper  atque  aquam,  impone  lapi- 
dem minorem,  qui  ligno  junctus  est,  tenensque  in  superior! 
parte  ipsum  lignum,  converte  modicum  inter  manus  tuas,  et 
mox  per  impulsum  illius  lapidis,  qui  ligatus  est  inferius,  cir- 
cumferelur,  sicque  circumlerendo  mole  per  quatuor  vel  tres 
horas,    Interdum  vero  respice  et  proba  digito,  et  rursum  in- 


TRANSLATION. 


249 


silver  with  the  gold  into  it,  and  with  quickness  rub  and  grind 
it  with  the  curved  and  glowing  iron,  until  you  feel  in  the  vase 
nothing  but  a  liquid,  and  directly  pour  it  into  water.  This 
water  being  thrown  away,  put  the  gold  into  the  left  hand, 
and  wash  it  carefully,  proving  with  the  finger  if  it  be  well 
ground,  and  if  it  is,  place  it  upon  a  clean  Hnen  cloth,  and  cast 
it  here  and  there  until  the  water  be  dried  away. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

THE  SAME,  IN  ANOTHER  MANNER. 

Blt  if  the  nature  of  the  gold  is  such  that  you  cannot  thus 
grind  it,  take  a  smooth  stone,  and  make  a  hollow  three 
fingers  in  breadth,  and  of  a  like  depth.  Then  fashion  for 
yourself  a  harder  stone  than  it,  small,  so  that  it  can  be 
turned  round  in  this  hollow,  and  long,  so  that  it  can  be  fixed 
and  made  firm  in  wood,  which  wood  must  be  three  yards  in 
length,  and  in  the  lower  part,  to  which  the  stone  is  to  be 
joined,  it  must  be  of  the  thickness  of  a  flute.  Above  this 
stone,  at  the  height  of  half  a  foot,  this  wood  is  pierced  through, 
and  to  which  another  thin  piece  of  wood,  two  palms  in 
breadth,  in  which  a  projection  is  made,  which  may  pass 
through  the  perforation  of  the  long  piece  of  wood,  upon  which 
thin  wood  a  stone  is  tied,  of  the  size  of  a  foot,  from  which 
stone  upwards  the  wood  is  made  thin  and  cut  round  and 
smooth,  so  that  it  can  be  turned  round  between  the  hands. 
These  things  being  thus  arranged,  place  the  larger  stone  in  a 
basin,  or  a  flat  wooden  vase,  and  see  that  the  stone  lie  firmly 
and  that  the  vase  is  firmly  placed.  And  when  you  have 
placed  the  gold  with  the  quicksilver  in  the  hollow,  and  sand 
and  water  above  it,  put  on  the  smaller  stone  which  is  joined 
to  the  wood,  and  holding  this  wood  in  the  upper  part,  turn  it 
round  a  little  between  your  hands,  and  soon,  through  the  im- 
pulse of  that  stone  which  is  fixed  on  below,  it  is  carried 
round,  and  thus,  by  the  rotation,  grind  for  four  or  three  hours. 
Sometimes,  however,  examine  it  and  prove  it  with  the  finger, 


250 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


251 


and  again  put  in  sand  with  water.  When  from  the  rotation 
and  re-rotation  the  sand  has  begun  to  bubble  and  be  diffused 
over  the  stone,  collect  it  again  always,  and  replace  it  in  the 
hollow  with  a  small,  long,  and  thin  wood,  unless  by  chance 
the  gold  should  be  scattered  and  not  milled.  But  when  it  is 
completely  ground  it  is  taken  out  and  washed  and  dried  as 
above,  and  it  is  placed  upon  a  scale.  If,  however,  any  should 
be  deficient,  the  dregs  which  flow  from  the  stone  are 
washed,  and  it  is  thus  found  ;  for  this  reason  it  is  that  the 
stone  is  placed  in  the  vase.  In  this  manner  also  should  pure 
silver,  very  thinly  beaten,  and  mixed  with  quicksilver,  be 
milled,  because  it  cannot  be  milled  in  the  hot  vessel  with  a 
heated  iron.  It  should  be  so  mixed  together,  however,  that 
five  parts,  by  weight,  may  be  of  quicksilver,  and  the  sixth  be 
pure  silver. 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

THE  SAME  AS  ABOVE. 

You  can  also  grind  gold  lighter  in  this  manner.  Take  a  large 
vase  of  clay  proved  in  the  fire,  and  place  it  in  the  coals  until 
it  quite  glows  ;  and  put  into  it  the  gold  mixed  with  the  quick- 
silver and  broken  up  very  small,  and  holding  it  with  the  pin- 
cers, move  round  the  hand  evenly,  and  you  will  soon  see  how 
the  gold  is  liquefied  and  mixed  with  the  quicksilver.  And 
when  it  has  become  quite  liquid,  directly  pour  it  into  water, 
and  wash  and  dry  it  as  above.  Beware  above  all  of  this,  that 
you  do  not  grind,  or  gild,  fasting,  because  the  exhalation  of 
quicksilver  is  of  great  danger  to  a  fasting  stomach,  and  it 
generates  different  infirmities,  against  which  you  should  use 
Zedoar  and  the  berries  of  the  laurel,  with  pepper  and  garlick 
and  wine.  After  this,  weigh  this  gilding  substance  in  the 
balance  and  divide  it  in  two,  and  the  half  of  it  again  into 
two,  and  until  you  obtain  single  drams,  and  put  them  singly 
into  goose-quills,  that  you  may  know  how  much  you  may  lay 
on  in  gilding  in  every  place.  Then  beat  a  portion  of  red 
copper  into  the  shape  of  a  chisel,  and  hx  it  to  a  handle,  and 


252  THEOPHILl  LIBER  III. 

ejus  lima  et  rade  rotundam  et  aliquantum  tenuem,  quam  fri- 
cabis  vivo  argento  donee  alba  fiat,  ut  inde  possis  deaurare. 
Postea  facies  confectionem  ad  iiivivandum  opus  deaurandum 
que  hoe  modo. 


CAPUT  XXXVIIL 

DE  INVIVANDIS  ET  DEAURANDIS  AURICULIS. 

SUME  villi  lapidem,  de  quo  supra  diximus,  ettere  diligenter 
super  lapidem  siecum,  addesque  ei  tertiam  partem  salis,  et 
mitte  in  testam  ollse  capacem,  infundens  que  ei  aquam  illam,  in 
quam  projecisti  aurum  noviter  molitum,  atque  imponens  modi- 
cum vivi  argenti,  mitte  super  carbones  donee  calidum  fiat,  et  cum 
ligno  commove.  Habeas  etiam  setas  porci  grossitudine  trium 
digitorum  aut  quatuor,  ferro  colligatas  in  medio,  duas  partes 
mundas,  cum  quibus  lavabis  aurum  et  argentum,  et  duas  cum 
quibus  deaurabis,  unam  siccam  alteram  humidam.  His  om- 
nibus hoc  ordine  compositis,  accipe  auriculas  argenteas  ad 
manus,  et  panniculum  lineum  complicatum  tinge  in  confec- 
tionem cahdam,  cum  quo  fricabis  omnia  loca,  quae  deaurare 
volueris  in  eis.  Cumque  invivare  volueris,  calefac  eas  super 
carbones  et  cum  setis  ipsa  confectione  humidis  frica  illas  for- 
titer,  donee  omnes  fossurse  vivo  argento  fiant  albae,  interdum 
calefaciendo  et  interdum  fricando,  et  ubi  cum  setis  non  potueris 
pertingere,  cum  cupro  deauratorio  et  ligno  gracili  fricabis, 
faciens  hoc  super  scultellam  deauratoriam  ligneam,  quae  sit  ad 
modicum  opus  tornatilis,  capax,  et  ad  magnum  quadra,  cava 
et  aequalis.  Deinde  super  ipsam  scultellam  incide  deauratu- 
ram  minutatim  cum  cultello,  et  cum  cupro  deauratorio  pone 
diligenter  per  omnia,  et  humidis  setis  aequa,  atque  cum  for- 
cipe  longo  et  gracili  in  anteriori  parte  duobus  panniculis  in- 
voluto  levabis,  et  pones  super  carbones  donee  calefiat,  et  setis 


TRANSLATION. 


253 


file  and  scrape  its  end  round  and  somewhat  thin  ;  you  will  rub 
it  with  quicksilver  until  it  is  made  white,  that  you  may  be  able 
to  gild  with  it.  Afterwards  make  the  composition  for  reviving 
and  gilding  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

OF  REVIVING   AND  GILDING  THE  HANDLES. 

Take  the  wine-stone,  of  which  we  have  before  spoken,  and 
grind  it  carefully  upon  a  dry  stone,  and  add  to  it  a  third  part 
salt,  and  put  it  into  a  large  vase  of  clay,  and  pouring  upon  it 
that  water  into  which  you  have  thrown  the  recently  milled 
gold,  and  putting  to  it  a  little  quicksilver,  place  it  upon  the 
coals  until  it  is  made  hot,  and  stir  it  with  wood.  Have  also 
(a  brush  of)  hog's  bristles  of  the  thickness  of  three  or  four 
fingers,  bound  together  with  iron  in  the  middle ;  you  clean 
both  ends,  with  which  you  will  wash  the  gold  and  silver, 
and  (have)  two  with  which  you  will  gild,  one  dry,  the 
other  wet.  These  things  arranged  in  this  order,  take  the 
silver  handles  in  your  hand,  and  dip  a  small  linen  cloth,  folded, 
into  the  hot  preparation,  with  which  you  will  rub  all  the 
places  which  you  may  wish  to  gild  in  them.  And  when  you 
wish  to  revive  them,  warm  them  over  the  coals,  and  with  the 
brushes  moistened  with  the  same  preparation,  rub  them  strongly, 
until  all  the  hollows  are  made  white  with  the  quicksilver, 
sometimes  warming  and  sometimes  rubbing ;  and  where  you 
cannot  reach  with  the  brushes,  you  will  rub  with  the  brass 
gilder  and  the  slender  wood,  doing  this  over  a  wooden  gilding 
dish,  which  may  be  turned  for  a  small  work,  and  capacious 
and  square  and  hollow  and  flat  for  a  large  work.  Then  over 
this  dish  cut  the  gilding  (preparation)  very  small  with  a 
knife,  and  lay  it  carefully  over  all  with  the  copper  gilder,  and 
smooth  it  with  the  moistened  brushes  :  and  with  the  lonof  and 
thin  tongs,  enveloped  at  the  extremity  by  two  small  pieces  of 
linen,  you  will  raise  it,  and  place  it  over  the  coals  until  it  is 
made  hot,  and  you  will  again  smooth  it  with  the  brushes,  and 


254 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


255 


you  will  do  this  until  the  gold  adhere  everywhere.  Cut  the 
gold  a  second  time,  and  superpose  it  with  the  copper  instru- 
ment, and  do  as  above  with  the  fire  and  brushes.  And  a 
third  time  you  do  Ukewise.  And  when  for  the  third  time  the 
gold  has  commenced  to  dry,  you  will  rub  it  with  the  dry 
brushes  until  it  begins  to  grow  pale.  If,  however,  it  should 
happen  through  negligence  that  any  blemish  appear  upon  the 
silver,  where  the  gold  may  be  placed  thinly  and  unequally, 
superpose  it  with  the  copper  instrument,  and  spread  it  with 
the  dry  brushes  until  it  is  even  everywhere.  When  you  see 
which,  place  it  in  water,  and  wash  it  with  the  clean  brushes, 
and  again  placing  it  over  the  coals,  warm  it  until  it  become 
altogether  yellow. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

OF  POLISHING  THE  GILDING. 

Take  fine  brass  wire,  bending  it  so  that  the  folds  may  be  the 
length  of  a  finger;  and  when  they  have  been  four  times 
folded,  bind  them  with  a  flaxen  thread  so  that  they  may 
be  as  one.  Of  these  parcels  make  four,  or  five,  or  six,  so  that 
one  kind  may  have  three,  another  four,  a  third  five,  and  so 
increasing  unto  eight.  All  these  being  separately  tied  up, 
make  a  small  hole  in  a  piece  of  wood,  in  which  you  place  one 
of  these  small  bundles,  and  pour  in  lead,  so  that  when  it  has 
become  cold,  and  you  have  taken  it  out,  these  folds  may  adhere 
together  as  if  fixed  in  a  leaden  knob.  In  this  manner  make 
with  each  parcel  separate  leaden  knobs,  and  now  cutting  all 
the  ligatures  at  the  other  end,  file  and  scrape  their  tops,  that 
they  may  become  round  and  smooth ;  when  with  these,  as  if 
carving  them,  you  have  polished  them,  you  polisl)  the  gilt 
handles  in  pure  water  and  in  a  clean  vessel.  When,  by  rub- 
bing, you  have  polished  these  in  the  uttermost  part,  you  place 
them  upon  the  coals,  until,  being  made  warm,  they  are 
changed  into  a  yellow  colour,  and  lose  the  brightness  which 


256 


THEOPHILI   LTBER  IIT. 


poliendo  acceperant,  extinctasque  in  aqua  rursum  diligenter 
sculpendo  polies,  donee  eximium  fulgorem  aeciplant,  sicque 
colorabis  eas,  tali  confectione. 


CAPUT  XL. 

DE  COLORANDO  AURO. 

SUME  attramentum,  mitte  in  testam  ollae  mundam  et  igne 
probatam,  ponens  super  carbones,  donee  omnino  liquefiat 
et  indurescat.  Deinde  aufer  a  testa  et  mitte  sub  ipsos  car- 
bones,  atque  cooperi  diligenter,  et  cum  folle  suffla,  donee  com- 
buratur  et  in  rubeum  colorem  convertatur.  Statim  ablatum 
ab  igne  cum  refrigeratum  fuerit,  tere  in  scutella  lignea  cum 
ferreo  malleo,  addens  ei  tertiam  partem  salis,  temperansque 
cum  vino  sive  urina,  rursum  fortiter  tere,  donee  spissum  fiat 
sicut  fex.  Ex  hac  confectione  cum  penna  cooperi  quod  de- 
auratura  est,  sic  ut  nihil  auri  appaieat,  et  pone  super  car- 
bones,  donee  exsiccetur,  et  fumus  ex  omni  parte  modicum 
procedat,  et  mox  auferens  ab  igne  mitte  in  aquam,  lavans 
diligenter  cum  setis  mundis,  rursumque  exsiccans  super  car- 
bones,  involve  panno  mundo  donee  refrigeretur. 


CAPUT  XLI. 

DE   POLIENDO  NIGELLO. 

TENENS  vero  illud  in  eodem  panno,  rade  diligenter  omnia 
loca,  quae  nigello  denigrata  sunt,  cum  ferro  rasorio. 
Post  haec  habeas  (Uapidem)  nigrum  et  mollem,  qui  leviter 
possit  incidi  et  pene  cum  ungue  radi,  et  cum  illo  tVicabis 

*  "  lapidem,"  non  apparet  in  codice  Harho  j  hoc  snrrogatur  ex  Cod.  Gnelpher- 
butane. 


TRANSLATION. 


257 


they  have  taken  in  polishing  :  quenched  in  water  you  again 
carefully,  as  if  carving,  polish  them  until  they  receive  a  most 
brilliant  lustre,  and  you  will  thus  colour  them  with  this  com- 
position. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

OF  COLOURING  GOLD. 

Take  atramentum;  put  it  in  an  earthen  vessel,  clean,  and 
proved  in  the  fire,  placing  it  over  the  coals  until  it  has  be- 
come liquefied  and  grows  hard.  Then  take  it  from  the  vase, 
and  place  it  under  the  same  coals,  and  cover  it  carefully,  and 
blow  with  the  bellows  until  it  is  calcined  and  changed  into  a 
red  colour.  Immediately  carrying  it  from  the  fire,  when  it 
has  become  cold,  grind  it  in  a  wooden  cup  with  an  iron 
pestle,  adding  to  it  a  third  part  salt,  and  tempering  it  with 
wine  or  urine,  again  grind  it  strongly  until  it  is  made  as  thick 
as  lees.  With  a  pen  cover  the  gilding  with  this  composition 
so  that  no  gold  appear,  and  place  it  over  the  coals  until  it  is 
dried,  and  a  shght  vapour  comes  from  it  everywhere,  and 
immediately  taking  it  away  from  the  fire  place  it  in  water, 
washing  it  carefully  with  clean  bristles ;  and  again  drying  it 
over  the  coal,  wrap  it  in  a  clean  cloth  until  it  grows  cold. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

OF  POLISHING  NIELLO. 

Holding  it  in  the  same  cloth,  scrape  all  the  parts  carefully 
which  are  blackened  with  the  niello,  with  the  cutting  instru- 
ment. 

Afterwards  you  have  a  black  and  soft  stone,  which  can 
easily  be  cut  and  almost  be  scraped  with  the  nail,  and  with  it 

s 


258 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


259 


you  rub  the  niello,  wetted  with  saliva,  carefully  and  smoothly 
everywhere,  until  all  the  drawings  are  plainly  seen,  and  it  is 
quite  smooth.  You  also  have  a  piece  of  wood  from  the  lime 
tree,  of  the  length  and  thickness  of  the  smallest  finger,  dry 
and  smoothly  cut;  upon  which  you  place  this  wet  powder, 
which  comes  from  the  stone  and  sahva  in  rubbing,  and  with 
this  wood  and  the  same  powder  you  rub  the  niello  a  long- 
time, and  lightly,  and  always  add  saliva,  that  it  may  be  wet, 
until  it  is  made  brilliant  everywhere.  Then  take  wax  from 
the  hollow  of  your  ear,  and  when  you  have  wiped  the  niello 
clean  with  a  fine  linen  cloth,  you  anoint  it  everywhere,  and 
with  goat  or  hart's  skin  you  will  lightly  rub  it  until  it  is  made 
quite  bright. 


CHAPTER  XLIT. 

OF  ORNAMENTING  THE  CUP  OF  THE  CHALICE. 

The  handles  being  completely  finished  in  this  manner,  take 
the  cup  of  the  chaHce,  the  ribs  of  which  you  have  ah-eady 
blackened  one  half,  and  file  and  scrape  those  parts  which 
you  have  alternatively  left  without  niello,  and  portray 
upon  them  whatever  work  you  wish,  so,  however,  that  it 
may  somewhat  differ  from  all  the  niello  work,  and  with  a 
slender  sculping  iron  you  will  carve  it  very  finely.  You  will 
afterwards  gild  them,  and  all  the  vase  inside  and  outside,  the 
niello  excepted,  and  you  will  polish  and  colour  them  like  the 
handles.  Then  you  cover  a  round  anvil,  and  you  will  bind 
it  round  with  smooth  parchment,  over  which  you  place  the 
cup,  which  the  boy  sitting  before  you  can  hold  with  both 
hands,  adjusting  each  rib  to  the  anvil  evenly,  according  to 
what  you  may  order  him.  In  the  mean  time  take  a  fine  in- 
strument which  has  a  hole  at  the  point,  by  the  blow  of  which 
you  produce  a  very  fine  circle,  and  you  will  fill  up  all  the 
grounds  in  the  gilt  ribs  with  it,  striking  lightly  upon  it  with  a 
hammer,  and  joining  successively  each  circle  to  the  other 
with  punched  work.  This  being  accomplished,  place  the  cup 
over  the  coals  until  these  strokes  receive  a  yellow  colour  in- 

s  2 


260 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


261 


side;  you  will  likewise  file  and  polish  the  niello  as  above. 
Then  join  on  the  handles,  each  in  its  place,  and  through  the 
holes  which  are  in  them  fasten  them  with  golden  nails,  strik- 
ing upon  them  with  a  slender  iron  hammer,  and  with  another 
iron  placed  under  until  they  stand  firmly,  and  scrape  and 
polish  these  beaten  places  carefully,  that  no  one  may  perceive 
how  they  are  joined. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

OF  THE  FOOT  OF  THE  CHALICE. 

After  this  take  a  fourth  part  of  the  silver,  adding  to  it  what- 
ever you  have  filed  and  scraped,  and  melt  it  as  above ;  with 
it  you  make  the  foot  with  its  knob  like  the  foot  of  the  smaller 
chalice,  excepting  that  in  this  larger  one  you  v^^ill  make  the 
"ribs  ascending  from  the  broad  part  of  the  foot  below  up  to 
the  knob,  the  half  of  which  you  will  blacken,  and  you  carve 
and  will  gild  the  others,  and  will  decorate  them  in  all  manners 
as  the  cup.  Which  being  finished,  you  will  gild  and  join 
on  the  ring,  which  is  to  be  placed  between  the  cup  and  the 
knob,  and  you  fasten  it  as  upon  the  smaller  chalice. 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

OF  THE  PATENA. 

Then  melt  whatever  should  remain  of  the  silver.  When  you 
have  thinned  this,  make  a  circle  in  the  middle  of  it,  according 
to  the  breadth  of  the  chalice,  and  below  this  circle  measure  out 
eight  spaces  equally  divided,  and  in  each  space  make  half  a 
circle,  that  there  may  be  as  if  eight  bows,  which  you  beat 
with  a  round  hammer  until  they  become  hollow,  and  below 
you  hammer  angles  between  these  bows  in  ductile  work,  also 
a  border  round  them  of  the  width  of  the  httle  nail,  which  may 


262 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


263 


rise  above  the  flat  part  of  the  whole  patena ;  you  sculp  this 
finely  and  cover  it  with  niello,  and  you  will  gild  the  rest  of 
the  patena,  and  you  polish  it  on  both  sides  as  above. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

OF  THE  PIPE. 

You  make  also  the  pipe  for  the  chalice  in  this  manner.  Make 
an  iron  in  length  a  palm  and  four  fingers,  wdiich  at  one  end 
must  be  very  fine  and  must  continue  increasing  to  the  other 
extremity,  which  must  be  like  a  straw ;  and  let  the  iron  be 
round  and  smoothly  filed.  And  when  you  have  thinned  some 
pure  silver,  fold  it  round  this  iron,  joining  the  ends  smoothly 
with  a  file,  and  taking  off  the  iron,  place  it  in  the  fire,  and 
solder  it.  Again  placing  the  iron  in  it,  beat  it  with  the 
hammer  equally  over  all  until  the  join  is  no  longer  visible. 
Then  make,  by  itself,  a  knob  round  and  hollow,  or  square  and 
solid,  and  make  a  perforation  in  it,  through  which  the  pipe  is 
placed  from  the  lower  part  almost  to  the  top,  and  thus,  the 
iron  being  taken  away,  you  will  again  solder  everywhere. 
And  when  it  has  become  firm,  the  iron  being  put  on  anew,  you 
beat  everywhere  from  the  knob  downwards  until  it  is  made 
smooth  and  firm  ;  and  from  the  knob  upwards,  namely,  in 
that  part  which  is  wider  and  thicker,  place  on  an  iron,  thin 
and  wide,  according  to  the  size  of  the  pipe,  and  beat  it  with 
the  hammer  upon  an  anvil,  so  that  the  upper  opening  may  be 
square  and  thin,  which  from  the  knob  upwards  should  sur- 
mount the  chalice  and  be  held  in  the  mouth,  but  be  below 
round  and  slender.  Which  being  done,  if  you  wish,  you  can 
ornament  the  knob  with  niello,  and  you  will  gild  the  rest  of 
the  pipe  in  the  fashion  above.  Take  great  care  in  this,  that 
you  strongly  scrape  all  thick  silver  which  you  wish  to  gild, 
whether  for  a  cup,  or  plate,  or  bottle,  because  in  working 
it  forms  a  pellicle  outside,  from  the  fire  and  hammer, 
which,  if  not  scraped  away  when  it  is  gilt,  when  it  is  coloured 


264 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


265 


over  the  fire  frequently  and  for  a  long  time,  becomes  raised 
in  places  as  small  blisters,  whose  fracture  shows  the  silver, 
and  the  work  is  deteriorated,  nor  can  it  be  mended  unless  the 
gilding  be  wholly  scraped  off,  and  it  be  again  gilt. 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

OF  THE  GOLD  OF  THE  LAND  OF  HEVILATH. 

There  are  many  kinds  of  gold,  among  which  the  best  kind  is 
produced  in  the  land  of  Hevilath,  which,  according  to 
Genesis,  the  river  Phison  ^  surrounds.  The  veins  of  which, 
when  men,  skilful  in  this  art,  have  discovered  them  under- 
ground, they  dig  up,  and,  purified  by  fire  and  proved  in  the 
furnace,  they  subject  it  for  their  use. 


CHAPTER  XLVIL 

OF  ARABIAN  GOLD. 

Arabian  gold  is  also  very  precious  and  of  a  beautiful  red, 
the  employment  of  which  in  very  ancient  vases  is  frequently 
•  found,  which  kind  modern  workmen  are  compounding  when 
they  add  to  a  pale  gold  a  fifth  part  of  red  copper,  and  they 
deceive  many  unwary  persons.  This  can  be  guarded  against 
in  this  manner :  let  it  be  placed  in  the  fire,  and  if  it  is  pure 
gold  it  does  not  lose  its  brightness;  if,  however,  it  is  mixed,  it 
quite  changes  colour. 

'  In  the  "WolfenbUttel  MS.  the  river  Gyon  is  by  error  placed  for  the  Phison, 
which     compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Ilavilah."    Gen.  ii.  7. 


266 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


267 


CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

OF  SPANISH  GOLD. 

There  is  also  a  gold  called  Spanish  gold,  which  is  composed 
from  red  copper,  powder  of  basihsc  and  human  blood  and 
acid.  The  Gentiles,  whose  skilfulness  in  this  art  is  pro- 
bable, make  basihscs  in  this  manner.  They  have,  under- 
ground, a  house  walled  with  stones  everywhere,  above  and 
below,  with  two  very  small  windows,  so  narrow  that  scarcely 
any  light  can  appear  through  them ;  in  this  house  they  place 
two  old  cocks  of  twelve  or  fifteen  years,  and  they  give  them 
plenty  of  food.  When  these  have  become  fat,  through  the 
heat  of  their  good  condition,  they  agree  together  and  lay 
eggs.  Which  being  laid  the  cocks  are  taken  out  and  toads 
ai-e  placed  in,  which  may  hatch  the  eggs,  and  to  which  bread 
is  given  for  food.  The  eggs  being  hatched,  chickens  issue 
out,  like  hens'  chickens,  to  which  after  seven  days  grow  the 
tails  of  serpents,  and  immediately,  if  there  were  not  a  stone 
pavement  to  the  house,  they  would  enter  the  earth.  Guard- 
ing against  which,  their  masters  have  round  brass  vessels  of 
large  size,  perforated  all  over,  the  mouths  of  which  are  narrow, 
in  which  they  place  these  chickens,  and  close  the  mouths  with 
copper  coverings  and  inter  them  underground,  and  they  are 
nourished  with  the  fine  earth  entering  through  the  holes  for 
six  months.  After  this  they  uncover  them  and  apply  a  co- 
pious fire,  until  the  animals  inside  are  completely  burnt. 
Which  done,  when  they  have  become  cold,  they  are  taken 
out  and  carefully  ground,  adding  to  them  a  third  part  of  the 
blood  of  a  red  man,  which  blood  has  been  dried  and  ground. 
These  two  compositions  are  tempered  with  sharp  acid  in  a 
clean  vessel ;  they  then  take  very  thin  sheets  of  the  purest 
red  copper,  and  anoint  this  composition  over  them  on  both 
sides,  and  place  them  in  the  fire.  And  when  they  have  be- 
come glowing,  they  take  them  out  and  quench  and  wash 
them  in  the  same  confection  ;  and  they  do  this  for  a  long  time, 
until  this  composition  eats  through  the  copper,  and  it  takes 
the  colour  of  gold.    This  gold  is  })roper  for  all  work. 


268 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  XLIX. 

DE  AURO  ARENARIO. 

EST  aliud  aurum  quod  dicitur  harenarium,  quod  reperitur  in 
littoribus  Reni  hoc  modo.  Fodiuntur  harenae  in  locis  illis, 
ubi  spes  reperiendi  est,  et.ponuntur  super  ligneas  tabulas. 
Deinde  superfunditur  aqua  frequenter  et  diligenter,  efflu- 
entibusque  harenis  remanet  aurum  subtilissimum,  quod  singu- 
lariter  in  vasculo  reponitur.  Cumque  vas  dimidium  fuerit, 
imponitur  vivum  argentum,  et  manu  fortiter  fricatur,  donee 
omnino  commisceatur,  sicque  positum  in  pannura  subtilem 
extorquetur  vivum  argentum;  quod  vero  remanserit  ponitur 
in  vas  fusorium  et  funditur. 


CAPUT  L. 

DE  FABRICANDO  AUREO  CALICE. 

1GITUR  cujuscunque  generis  aurum  habueris,  si  calicem 
inde  componere  volueris,  et  ornare  lapidibus  et  electris 
atque  margaritis,  hoc  modo  incipies.  Primum  proba  partes 
singulas  auri,  si  possunt  cum  malleo  percuti,  sic  ut  non 
findantur,  et  quicquid  non  finditur  singulariter  pone;  quod 
vero  finditur,  singulariter  ut  coquatur.  Deinde  accipe  partem 
lateris  cocti,  et  secundum  quantitatem  auri  fode  in  eo  fos- 
suram,  quae  illud  capere  possit ;  et  si  non  habeas  laterem,  in 
lapide  sabuleo  item  quadro,  facta  fossula  cum  ferro,  mitte  in 
carbones  et  suffla.  Cumque  canduerit,  impone  aurum,  super- 
jectisque  carbonibus  suffla  diutissime,  atque  ejectum  percute 
cum  malleo ;  si  non  frangitur,  sufficit  ei ;  si  vero  frangitur, 
super  alium  lapidem  iterum  repone,  et  hoc  tamdiu  facias, 


TRANSLATION. 


269 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

OF  GOLD  SAND. 

There  is  another  gold,  which  is  called  sandy  (gold),  which 
is  found  upon  the  banks  of  the  Rhine  in  this  manner.  The 
sands  are  dug  up  in  those  places  where  there  is  expectation 
of  finding  it,  and  are  put  upon  wooden  tables.  Then  water  is 
frequently  and  carefully  poured  upon  them,  and,  the  sand 
flowing  away,  a  very  fine  gold  remains,  which,  is  replaced  in 
a  small  vessel  separately.  And  when  the  vase  is  half  full, 
quicksilver  is  placed  in  and  it  is  rubbed  strongly  with  the 
hand  until  it  is  quite  mixed  together,  and  thus  placed  in  a 
fine  cloth,  the  quicksilver  is  squeezed  from  it;  but  what  re- 
mains is  placed  in  a  crucible  and  is  melted. 


CHAPTER  L. 

OF  MAKING  THE  GOLDEN  CHALICE. 

Whatever  kind  of  gold  then  that  you  may  have,  if  you  wish 
to  make  a  chalice  from  it,  and  ornament  it  with  stones  and 
coloured  gems  and  pearls,  you  begin  in  this  manner.  First, 
prove  separate  pieces  of  gold,  if  they  can  be  beaten  with  the 
hammer  without  breaking,  and  what  is  not  broken  place  by 
itself,  but  that  whi.ch  is  broken,  separate,  that  it  may  be 
cooked.  Then  take  a  piece  of  burnt  brick,  and  according  to 
the  quantity  of  gold  carve  a  hollow  in  it,  which  can  contain 
it ;  and  if  you  have  not  brick,  a  hollow  being  made  in  a 
sandy  and  square  stone,  place  it  in  the  fire  and  blow  upon  it. 
And  when  it  has  become  hot,  place  in  the  gold,  and  coals 
being  laid  upon  it  blow  for  a  very  long  time,  and  being  taken 
out  beat  it  with  a  hammer ;  if  it  is  not  broken,  it  is  enough 
for  it :  if  however  it  is  broken,  replace  it  upon  another  stone. 


270 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


271 


and  you  must  do  this  until  it  cannot  be  broken  when  struck  \ 
Which  being  done  melt  all  the  gold  alike,  and  reduce  it  into 
one  mass,  and  divide  it  upon  the  balance  in  that  manner  in 
which  you  divided  the  gold  above ;  and  in  the  like  order  you 
will  fashion  the  handles,  according  to  the  form  you  may  wish, 
and  as  it  may  please  you.  But  if  you  should  wish  to  make 
it  with  a  gemmed  work,  beat  two  pieces  of  the  gold  so  thin 
that  a  mark  of  the  nail  can  be  impressed  upon  it,  and  cut 
them  out  in  that  form  which  you  wish  the  handles  to  have, 
which  pieces  both  belong  to  one  handle.  Then  compose  the 
solder  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  LI. 

OF  THE  SOLDER  OF  GOLD. 

Take  beech-wood  ashes,  and  make  a  lye  from  them,  which 
you  will  again  strain  through  the  same  ashes  that  they  may 
become  thick.  Place  them  again  in  the  pot,  and  cook  them 
to  one-third  of  the  bulk,  and  put  into  it  a  little  soap  and  a 
little  fat  of  an  old  pig.  And  when  it  has  become  cold  and 
has  reposed,  strain  it  carefully  through  a  cloth,  and  place  it 
in  a  copper  vessel  which  is  sound  everywhere  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  small  hole,  which  may  appear  at  the  top,  round, 
so  that  it  can  be  stopped  with  the  finger.  Afterwards  take  a 
piece  of  thin  copper,  which  you  moisten  with  water,  and  you 
will  rub  the  salt  over  it  on  each  side,  and  you  place  it  in  the 
fire,  and  when  it  has  glowed,  extinguish  it  in  a  clean  basin 
with  pure  water  in  which  may  be  kept  all  the  copper  burned. 
And  again  rub  the  salt  over  the  copper,  and  do  as  before, 
and  this,  until  at  length  there  be  enough.  Then  pour 
out  the  water  and  dry  the  powder  in  a  copper  vessel,  and 
grind  it  in  the  same  vessel  with  an  iron  mallet  until  it 
becomes  very  fine.    And  placing  it  over  the  coals,  agam  burn 

*  Here  there  is  an  addition,  apparently  an  interpolation,  in  the  Wolfenbuttel 
MS.  Leasing  s  Ed.  "  But  if  it  is  broken  a  little,  melt  it  with  sulphur,  and  it  will 
thus  be  remedied." 


272 


THEOPHILl   LIBER  III. 


Cumque  imposueris  smigma,  commisce  diligenter,  ponensque 
super  prunas  pariter  combure  fortiter  ac  deniio  tere.  Postea 
ex  anteriori  vase  funde  lexivam  in  illud,  in  quo  est  pulvis,  et 
commisce  atque  fac  bullire  diu,  et  cum  frigidum  fuerit  refunde 
simul  cum  pulvere  ubi  prius  erat,  ubi  etiam  quatuor  particulas 
cupri  impones,  per  quas  commisceatur  pulvis  per  omnia 
quotiens  volueris.  Hac  confectione  solidatur  aurum  et  argen- 
tum;  sed  in  solidando  auro  commoveatur  pulvis,-  ut  supra 
dictum  est,  in  argento  vero  solidando  non  moveatur. 


CAPUT  LII. 

DE  IMPONENDA  SOLIDATURA  AURO. 

HIS  ita  compositis  accipe  illas  duas  partes  auri,  quibus  auri- 
culas^ formasti,  et  pone  coram  te  gemmasque  quasimpo- 
nere  volueris,  pone  super  eas,  et  margaritas  ^,  unamquamque  in 
suo  loco.  Deinde  percute  aurum  gracile  et  longum,  et  trahe  inde 
fila  grossa,  mediocria  et  subtilia,  et  lima  ea  ferro  supradicto, 
ita  ut  in  eis  grana  formentur.  Quibus  recoctis,  repositis  et 
colligatis  singulariter  gemmis,  partem  majoris  fili,  aptabis 
cum  forcipe  subtili,  circa  oram  auris  in  utrisque  partibus  illis, 
et  cum  forcipe  incisorio  facies  subtilissimas  incisuras  in  cir- 
cuitu,  quibus  confirmabis  ipsa  fila  ne  cadant,  donee  solidentur. 
Postmodum  accipe  partem  auri  tenuem  et  ligneo  malleo 
Bequatam,  et  colloca  super  cam  fila  mediocria  multum  ordi- 
natim,  ita  ut  non  sibi  adhaereant,  sed  habeant  spatia  inter  se ; 
in  summitatibus  eorum  fiant  subtiles  incisurse  in  tenui  auro, 
quibus  ligentur.  Acceptoque  vasculo  in  quo  est  solidatura, 
concute  fortiter,  ut  commisceatur  pulvis,  et  cum  penna  gracili 
linies  ipsam  solidaturam  super  aurum  illud  et  super  fila  dili- 
genter  per  omnia,  mittesque  in  ignem  atque  sufilabis  foUe  et 

'  vitiose  "  auriculas  ;"  in  Cod.  Guelph.  "  auriculam,"  ^'^c^e^^6r. 
*  "  raartias,"  a  scriha  /also  poniUtr. 


TRANSLATION. 


273 


it,  and  grind  it  as  before.  And  when  you  have  put  in  the 
soap,  mix  it  carefully,  and  placing  it  over  the  live  coals,  again 
burn  it  strongly  and  grind  it  anew.  Afterwards  pour  in  the 
lye,  from  the  first  vessel,  into  that  in  which  is  the  powder,  and 
mix  it  and  boil  it  for  a  long  time,  and  when  it  has  become 
cold,  pour  it  back,  together  with  the  powder,  where  it  was 
before,  where  you  also  put  in  four  pieces  of  copper,  by  means 
of  which  the  powder  may  be  mixed  together  as  often  as  you 
wish.  With  this  composition  gold  and  silver  may  be  soldered ; 
but  in  soldering  gold  the  powder  must  be  stirred  together  as 
mentioned  above,  but  in  soldering  silver  it  must  not  be  stirred. 


CHAPTER  LII. 

OF  APPLYING  THE  SOLDER  UPON  GOLD. 

These  things  thus  arranged,  take  those  two  pieces  of  gold 
from  which  you  formed  the  handle,  and  place  them  before 
you,  and  lay  upon  them  the  gems  which  you  wish  to  apply, 
and  the  pearls,  each  one  in  its  place.  Then  beat  gold  fine 
and  long,  and  draw  from  it  wires,  thick,  middling  and  fine, 
and  file  them  with  the  instrument  indicated  above,  so  that 
beads  may  be  formed  upon  them.  These  being  re-cooked, 
the  gems  being  replaced  and  attached  one  by  one,  you  will 
adapt  a  piece  of  the  larger  wire,  with  the  fine  pincers,  about 
the  edge  of  the  handle  in  both  its  pieces,  and  with  the  cutting 
pincers  you  make  very  fine  incisions  around  them,  by  which 
you  will  fix  these  wires  that  they  may  not  fall  off,  until  they 
are  soldered.  Afterwards  take  a  piece  of  gold  thin  and 
smoothed  with  the  wooden  mallet,  and  fasten  upon  it  smaller 
wires  very  orderly,  so  that  they  may  not  be  clo^e  together, 
but  may  have  spaces  between  them ;  at  their  extremities  fine 
incisions  are  made  in  the  thin  gold  by  which  they  are  fixed. 
The  small  vase  being  taken  in  which  is  the  soldering,  agitate 
it  strongly,  that  the  powder  may  be  mixed  together,  and  with 
a  fine  pen  anoint  this  solder  upon  the  gold  and  over  the  wires 
carefully  everywhere,  and  place  it  in  the  fire,  and  you  will 

T 


274 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


^--^.^jr.^  ore,  donee  videas  ipsam  solidaturam  ita  circumquaqiie  dis- 
currere,  quasi  aqua  perfundatur.  Et  mox  asperges  aqua 
modice  atque  eicies,  et  diligenter  lavabis,  rursumque  super 
linies  solidaturam,  ac  sicut  prius  solidabis,  donee  omnia  fila 
firmiter  stent. 


CAPUT  LIII. 

DE  IMPONENDIS  GEMMIS  ET  MARGARITIS. 

POST  hsec  incide  per  particulas  quasi  corrigias  ita,  ut  una- 
quseque  corrigia  habeat  filum  unum,  quas  statim  com- 
plicabis  et  facies  inde  domunculas,  quibus  lapides  claudantur, 
minores  et  majores,  ad  mensuram  uniuscuj usque,  ordinabis- 
que  eas  in  suis  locis.  Habebis  quoque  farinam  de  similagine 
frumenti  sive  siliginis,  quam  miscebis  aqua  in  parvulo  vasculo, 
et  pones  super  carbones,  ut  parum  calefiat ;  in  quam  tingues 
modice  domunculas  illas,  unamquamque  singulariter  in  in- 
feriore  parte  sicque  stabilies  in  suo  loco.  Omnibus  vero  sta- 
bilitis  pone  super  carbones  partem  auri  super  quam  stabilisti, 
donee  exsiccetur  humor  farinse,  et  mox  adhaerebunt.  Tolle  quo- 
que fila  subtilia,  et  percute  ea  modice  super  incudem,  ita  ut  ali- 
quantulum  tenua  sint,  et  tamen  grana  superius  et  inferius  non 
procedant  vel  perdant  formam  suam  inde  complicabis  floscu- 
los  majores  et  minores,  unde  implebis  campos  omnes  inter 
domunculas;  quos  cum  formaveris  subtili  forcipe,  intinges 
eos  in  humida  farina,  sicque  collocabis  unamquamque  in  suo 
loco.  Quo  facto  pone  super  carbones,  ut  siccetur,  statim 
que  superlinies  solidaturam,  et  solidabis  sicut  superius.  Hoc 
modo  utrisque  partibus  unius  auriculae  solidatis  ac  firmatis, 
conjunge  eas  et  interpone  eis  fundum,  in  circuitu  ejus  juxta 
Oram  interiorem,  videlicet  unam  tenuem  partem  auri,  quae  sit 
sicut  festuca,  et  sequalis  per  omnia.  Quam  partem  cum  inter 
illas  duas  junxeris,  complica  tres  particulas  ferri  tenues,  et  fac 


TRANSLATION. 


275 


blow  with  the  bellows  and  the  mouth  until  you  see  this  solder 
run  everywhere  as  if  water  were  poured  over  it.  And  im- 
mediately sprinkle  it  slightly  with  water,  and  take  it  out,  and 
you  will  carefully  wash  it,  and  again  anoint  the  solder,  and 
will  solder  it  as  before  until  all  the  wires  hold  firmly. 


CHAPTER  LIIL 

OF   APPLYING  THE  GEMS  AND  PEARLS. 

Afterwards  cut  these  in  pieces  Hke  straps,  so  that  every 
band  may  have  a  wire,  which  you  will  bend  together,  and 
make  small  settings  of  them,  by  which  the  stones  may  be  en- 
closed, large  and  small,  to  the  size  of  each  one,  and  you  will 
arrange  them  in  their  places.  You  will  also  have  flour  of 
wheat  or  rye,  which  you  will  mix  with  water  in  a  small 
cup,  and  place  over  the  coals,  that  it  may  become  a  little 
w^arm ;  in  this  you  dip  these  settings  slightly,  one  by  one, 
each  in  the  lower  part,  and  so  fix  them  in  their  place.  All 
being  made  fast,  place  the  piece  of  gold  upon  which  you  have 
fastened  them  over  the  coals  until  the  moisture  of  the  flour 
'  is  dried,  and  they  will  soon  adhere.  Take  also  the  fine  wire 
and  beat  it  slightly  upon  the  anvil,  so  that  it  may  be  rather 
thin,  and  yet  that  the  beads  above  and  below  may  not  pro- 
ject nor  lose  their  form:  with  them  you  will  weave  flowers, 
large  and  small,  with  which  you  will  fill  up  all  the  grounds  be- 
tween the  settings  ;  when  you  have  formed  these  with  the  fine 
pincers  dip  them  into  the  wet  flour,  and  you  will  thus  put  each 
in  its  place.  Which  being  done,  place  it  over  the  coals  that 
it  may  become  dry,  and  immediately  anoint  the  soldering  and 
solder  it  as  above.  Both  pieces  of  one  handle  being  soldered 
and  made  firm,  join  them  together,  and  place  a  foundation  to 
them  around  them  near  their  inner  edge,  namely,  a  thin  piece 
of  gold,  which  may  be  hke  a  straw,  and  smooth  everywhere. 
When  you  have  joined  which  piece  between  the  two,  bend 
three  small  thin  pieces  of  iron,  and  make  small  stays  which 

T  2 


276 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


277 


can  hold  the  outer  pieces  of  gold  in  three  places  outside,  so 
that  the  third  which  compasses  the  inside  near  the  edge,  cannot 
be  disunited.  This  being  done,  anoint  the  solder  everywhere, 
and  you  will  dry  it  a  little  over  the  fire,  and  the  coals  being 
arranged  and  glowing  you  make  a  hollow  among  them,  in 
which  you  place  the  handle,  and  about  this  you  will  arrange 
the  coals  in  order,  so  that  they  may  not  touch  the  gold,  but  rise 
around  it  like  a  wall,  until  they  dominate  the  gold ;  and  you 
will  then  place  above  it  two  or  three  slight  pieces  of  iron, 
which  may  pass  across.  Over  this  you  will  place  the  coals 
everywhere,  and  cover  it  carefully,  so  however  that  some 
openings  may  remain  among  these  coals,  through  which  you 
can  see  how  the  solder  flows.  When  you  see  which  instantly 
sprinkle  it  with  a  little  water :  you  take  it  out  and  will  gently 
wash  and  dry  it,  and,  carefully  considering  it,  if  there  is  any 
fault  you  correct  it,  and  again  anointing  it  as  before,  you  will 
solder  it,  and  do  this  until  it  is  made  firm  everywhere.  In  this 
manner  you  will  make  the  other  handle  and  solder  it.  Which 
being  accomplished,  join  them  both  to  the  cup  of  the  chalice 
in  their  places,  and  make  two  lines  upon  the  cup  itself  with  a 
graver,  by  means  of  which  you  can  see  whether  they  are 
placed  straight  in  soldering.  Then  melt  pure  gold,  and  mix 
with  it  a  third  part  of  red  and  pure  copper,  which  likewise, 
fused  and  slightly  beaten,  you  will  file  altogether  and  place  in 
a  goose  quill.  After  this  accumulate  before  the  furnace  a 
great  heap  of  coals,  and  place  in  them  the  cup  of  the  chalice, 
so  that  half  of  it  may  be  altogether  under  the  coals,  and  that 
part  upon  which  a  part  of  the  handle  is  to  be  placed  may 
altogether  rise  above  them;  you  immediately  join  which 
(handle)  on  to  it,  and  anoint  the  vase  with  the  handle  inside 
and  out  with  the  soldering,  and  you  will  scatter  the  filings 
which  you  had  placed  in  the  quill  inside  and  out  with  the 
solder,  about  the  junction  by  which  the  handle  is  united  to 
the  cup,  and  thus,  fire  being  placed  around,  you  will  heap  the 
coals  in  a  circle,  as  you  did  before  about  the  handle,  and 
place  the  irons  over  it,  which  you  cover  plentifully  with  coals. 
In  the  front  part  within  the  hollow  of  the  cup  place  the  coals 
in  the  shape  of  a  small  furnace,  so  that  the  coals  may  lie 


278 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


foramen  in  medio  appareat  per  quod  possit  sufflari,  ut  calor 
superius  et  inferius  sequalis  sit.  Cumque  videris  solidaturam 
circumfluere,  et  quasi  tertio  inundare,  asperge  diligenter  mo- 
dica  aqua,  et  eiciens  lava  et  sicca,  rursumque  simili  modo 
solida,  et  tamdiu  donee  firmissime  adhsereat.  Conversumque 
vas  in  alteram  partem,  parem  auriculam  eodem  modo  con- 
junge  et  solida. 


CAPUT  LIV. 

DE  ELECTRO. 

QUO  facto  tolle  partem  auri  tenuem  et  conjunge  ad  oram 
vasis  superiorem,  atque  metire  ab  una  auricula  usque  ad 
alteram  ;  quse  pars^  latitudinis  sit,  quanta  est  grossitudo 
lapidum,  quos  imponere  volueris ;  et  coUocans  eos  in  suo 
ordine,  sic  dispone ;  in  primis  stet  unus  lapis  quatuor  mar- 
garitis  in  angulis  positis,  deinde  electrum,  juxta  quod  lapis 
cum  margaritis,  rursumque  electrum,  sicque  ordinabis  ut  juxta 
auriculas  semper  lapides  stent,  quorum  domunculas  et  campos, 
easque  domunculas,  in  quibus  electrum  ponendum  est,  com- 
pones  et  solidabis  ordine  quo  supra.  Et  in  altera  parte  vasis 
similiter  facies.  Si  vero  volueris  in  medio  ventris  gemmas  et 
margaritas  ponere,  eodem  modo  facies.  Quo  facto  conjunges 
eas  et  solidabis  sicut  auriculas.  Post  haec  in  omnibus  domun- 
culis,  in  quibus  electra  ponenda  sunt,  coaptabis  singulas 
partes  auri  tenues,  conjunctasque  diligenter  eicies,  atque  cum 
mensura  et  regula  incides  corrigiolam  auri  quod  aliquantulum 
sit  spissius,  et  complicabis  eas  circa  oram  unius  cujusque 
partis  dupliciter,  ita  ut  inter  ipsas  corrigiunculas  subtile 
spatium  sit  in  circuitu,  quod  spatium  vocatur  limbus  electri. 
Deinde  eadem  mensura  atque  regula  incides  corrigiolas  om- 
nino  subtilissimi  auri,  in  quibus  subtili  forcipe  complicabis  et 

'     tantae,"  in  Cod.  Guelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


279 


thickly  around  the  circumference,  and  that  a  small  opening 
may  appear  in  the  midst,  through  which  it  can  be  blown,  that 
the  heat  above  and  below  may  be  equal.  And  when  you  see 
the  solder  flow  about,  and  as  if  undulating,  a  third  time, 
sprinkle  it  carefully  with  a  little  water,  and  taking  it  out, 
wash  and  dry  it,  and  again  solder  it  similarly,  and  until  it  ad- 
here very  firmly.  And  turning  the  vase  on  the  other  side, 
join  and  solder  the  fellow  handle  in  the  same  manner. 


CHAPTER  LIV. 

OF  COLOURED  GLASS  STONES  (OR  ENAMEL). 

Which  being  done,  take  a  thin  piece  of  gold  and  join  it  to 
the  upper  rim  of  the  vase,  and  measure  it  out  from  one  handle 
to  the  other ;  this  piece  must  be  of  the  breadth  as  is  the  size 
of  the  stones  which  you  wish  to  place  upon  it ;  and,  arranging 
them  in  their  order,  thus  dispose  them ;  first  a  stone  must  stand, 
four  pearls  being  placed  at  its  angles,  then  a  glass  gem,  next 
this  a  stone  with  pearls,  and  again  a  glass  gem ;  and  you  will 
so  arrange  them  that  the  stones  may  always  stand  next  the 
handles,  the  settings  and  grounds  of  which,  and  those  settings 
in  which  the  glass  gem  is  to  be  placed,  you  compose  and  solder 
in  the  order  above.  And  you  do  the  same  on  the  other  side 
of  the  vase.  If  however  you  wish  to  place  gems  and  pearls 
in  the  centre  of  the  body,  you  act  in  the  same  manner.  This 
being  done,  join  and  solder  them  as  the  handles.  After  this 
you  will  adapt  thin  pieces  of  gold  in  all  the  settings  in  which 
the  glass  gems  are  to  be  placed,  and,  carefully  fitted,  you  take 
them  out,  and  with  a  measure  and  rule  you  cut  a  small  band 
of  gold,  which  must  be  somewhat  thicker ;  and  you  will  bend 
them  round  the  rim  of  each  piece  in  a  double  manner,  so  that 
a  minute  space  may  exist  around  between  these  small  bands : 
this  space  is  called  the  border  of  the  enamel.  Then,  with  the 
same  measure  and  rule  you  cut  small  bands  of  exceedingly 
thin  gold,  in  which  you  will  bend  and  fashion  whatever  work 


280 


THEOPHILI    LIBER  III. 


formabis  opus  quodcunque  volueris  in  electris  facere,  sive  cir- 
culos,  sive  nodos,  sive  flosculos^  sive  aves,  sive  bestias,  sive 
imagines,  et  ordinabis  particulas  subtiliter  et  diligenter  unara- 
quamque  in  suo  loco,  atque  firmabis  humida  farina  super  car- 
bones.  Cumque  impleveris  unam  partem,  solidabis  eam  cum 
maxima  cautela,  ne  opus  gracile  et  aurum  subtile  disjungatur 
aut  liquefiat,  sicque  bis  aut  ter  facies,  donee  aliquantulum  sin- 
guise  particulae  adh^reant. 

Hoc  modo  omnibus  electris  compositis  et  solidatis  accipe 
omnia  genera  vitri,  quod  ad  hoc  opus  aptaveris,  et  de  singulis 
partibus  parvum  frangens  colloca  omnes  fracturas  simul  super 
unam  partem  cupri,  unamquamque  partem  per  se ;  mittensque 
in  ignem  compone  carbones  in  circuitu  et  desuper,  sufflansque 
diligenter  considerabis  si  sequaliter  liquefiant :  si  sic,  omnibus 
utere ;  si  vero  aliqua  particula  est  durior,  singulariter  repone. 
Accipiensque  singulas  partes  probati'^  vitri,  mitte  in  ignem 
singillatim,  et  cum  canduerit,  proice  in  vas  cupreum  in  quo  sit 
aqua,  et  statim  resiliet  minutatim,  quod  mox  confringas  cum 
rotundo  malleo  donee  subtile  fiat,  sicque  lavabis  et  pones  in 
concham  mundam,  atque  cooperies  panno  lineo.  Hoc  modo 
singulos  colores  dispones.  Quo  facto  tolle  unam  partem  auri 
solidati,  et  super  tabulam  agqualem  adhserebis  cum  cera  in 
duobus  locis,  accipiensque  pennam  anseris  incisam  gracile 
sicut  ad  scribendum,  sed  longiori  rostro  et  non  fisso,  hauries 
cum  ea  unum  ex  coloribus  vitri,  qualem  volueris^.  Quod  vero 
superfuerit  repone  in  vasculum  suum  et  cooperi,  sicque  facies 
ex  singulis  coloribus,  donee  pars  una  impleatur;  auferens 
ceram  cui  inhseserat,  pone  ipsam  partem  super  ferrum  tenue, 
quod  habeat  brevem  caudam,  et  cooperies  cum  altero  ferro 
quod  sit  cavum  in  similitudinem  vasculi,  sitque  per  omnia 
transforatum  gracile,  ita  ut  foramina  sint  interius  plana  et 
latiora,  et  exterius  subtiliora  et  hispida,  propter  arcendos 

'  "  sive  aures,"  in  MS.  videtur. 
^  "  auri/'  in  MS.  interponitur. 

^  "qui  erit  humidus,  et  cum  longo  cupro  gracili  et  in  summitate  subtili  rades  a 
rostro  pennae  subtiliter  et  implebis  quemcuiique  flosculum  volueris,  et  quantum 
volueris,"  ex  Codice  Guelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


281 


you  may  wish  to  make  in  enamel,  whether  circles,  or  knots, 
or  small  flowers,  or  birds,  or  animals,  or  figures ;  and  you  will 
arrange  the  small  pieces  delicately  and  carefully,  each  in  its 
place,  and  will  fasten  them  with  moistened  flour  over  the 
coals.  When  you  have  filled  one  portion,  you  will  solder  it 
with  the  greatest  care,  that  the  slender  and  fine  gold  may  not 
be  disjoined  nor  liquefy ;  and  do  thus  twice  or  three  times, 
until  the  separate  pieces  adhere  a  little. 

All  the  enamels  being  composed  and  soldered  in  this  man- 
ner, take  all  kinds  of  glass  which  you  had  prepared  for  this 
work,  and  breaking  a  particle  from  each  piece,  place  all  the 
fragments  together  upon  a  piece  of  copper,  each  piece  by 
itself,  and  placing  it  in  the  fire  arrange  the  coals  around  and 
above  it,  and  blowing  carefully,  you  will  see  whether  they 
melt  equally ;  if  so,  use  them  all ;  if  however  any  particle  is 
harder  (than  the  rest)  place  it  by  itself.  Taking  separate 
pieces  of  the  proved  glass,  place  them  in  the  fire  one  by  one, 
and  when  each  one  has  become  glowing,  throw  it  into  a 
copper  vessel  in  which  there  is  water,  and  it  instantly  flies 
into  small  fragments,  which  you  break  with  a  round  pestle 
until  made  quite  fine,  and  you  will  thus  wash  it  and  put  it 
into  a  clean  vessel,  and  you  cover  it  with  a  linen  cloth.  In 
this  manner  you  prepare  the  separate  colours.  Which  being 
done,  take  a  piece  of  the  soldered  gold,  and  you  will  fasten  it 
upon  a  smooth  table  with  wax  in  two  places,  and  taking  a 
goose  quill  cut  to  a  point,  as  if  for  w^riting  but  with  a  longer 
beak  and  not  split,  you  take  out  with  it  one  of  the  colours  of 
glass,  whichever  you  pleased  That  which  remains  over, 
replace  in  its  small  cup  and  cover  it,  and  do  this  with  each 
colour  until  one  piece  is  filled  :  taking  away  the  wax,  to  which 
it  had  adhered,  place  this  piece  upon  a  thin  iron,  which  may  have 
a  short  handle,  and  cover  it  with  another  iron  which  is  hollow 
like  a  cup,  and  let  it  be  perforated  finely  all  over,  so  that  the 
holes  may  be  inside  flat  and  wide,  and  outside  finer  and 

'  "  which  must  be  moist,  and  with  a  long  copper  instrument,  slender,  and  fine  at 
the  end  you  scrape  from  the  beak  of  the  pen,  delicately,  and  will  fill  up  whatever 
flower  you  wish,  and  how  you  please," — an  interpolation  in  the  Wolfenhuttel 
Manuscript. 


282 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


cineres,  si  forte  superceciderint ;  habeatque  ipsum  ferrum  in 
medio  superius  brevem  annulum,  cum  quo  superponatur  et 
eleveto.  Quo  facto  compone  carbones  magnos  et  longos, 
incendens  illos  valde ;  inter  quos  facies  locum  et  aequabis  cum 
ligneo  malleo,  in  quem  elevatur  ferrum  per  caudam  cum 
forcipe ;  ita  ut  coopertum  collocabis  diligenter,  atque  carbones 
in  circuitum  compones  et  sursum  ex  omni  parte,  acceptoque 
folle  utrisque  manibus  undique  sufflabis  donee  carbones 
sequaliter  ardeant.  Habeas  etiam  alam  integram  anseris,  sive 
alterius  avis  magnae,  quae  sit  extensa  et  ligno  ligata ;  cum  qua 
ventilabis  et  flabis  fortiter  ex  omni  parte,  donee  perspicias 
inter  carbones  ut  foramina  ferri  interius  omnino  candeant, 
sicque  flare  cessabis.  Expectans  vero  quasi  dimidia  hora 
discooperies  paulatim  donee  omnes  carbones  amoveas,  rur- 
sumque  expectabis  donee  foramina  ferri  interius  nigrescant, 
sicque  elevans  ferrum  per  caudam,  ita  coopertum  pones  retro 
fornacem  in  angulo  donee  omnino  frigidum  fiat.  Aperiens 
vero  tolles  electrum  et  lavabis,  rursumque  implebis  et  fundes 
sicut  prius,  sicque  facies  donee  liquefactum  sequaliter  per 
omnia  plenum  sit.    Hoc  modo  reliquas  partes  compones. 


CAPUT  LV. 

DE  POLIENDO  ELECTRO. 

QUO  facto,  tolle  partem  cerse  ad  longitudinem  dimidii 
pollicis,  in  quam  aptabis  electrum  ita,  ut  cera  ex  omni 
parte  sit,  per  quam  ceram  tenebis^  Deinde  super  duram 
cotem  et  sequalem  fricabis  diutissime  donee  claritatem  acci- 


'  "  et  fricabis  ipsum  electrum  super  lapidem  sabuleum  sequalem  diligenter  cum 
aqua,  donee  aurum  sequaliter  appareat  per  omnia,"  ex  Cod.  Guelph, 


TRANSLATION. 


283 


rough,  in  order  to  stop  the  cinders  if  by  chance  they  should 
fall  upon  it ;  this  iron  may  also  have  a  small  ring  above,  in 
the  middle,  by  which  it  may  be  superposed  and  taken  off. 
Which  being  done,  arrange  large  and  long  coals,  making 
them  very  hot,  among  which  you  make  a  space,  and  equalize 
with  a  wooden  mallet,  into  which  the  iron  is  raised  by  the 
handle  with  the  pincers,  so  that  when  covered  you  will  place 
it  carefully  and  arrange  the  coals  round  and  above  it  every- 
where, and  taking  the  bellows  with  both  hands  you  will  blow 
on  every  side  until  the  coals  glow  equally.  You  have  also  a 
wing  of  a  goose,  or  other  large  bird,  which  is  extended  and 
tied  to  wood,  with  which  you  will  wave  and  fan  strongly  all 
over  it,  until  you  perceive  between  the  coals  that  the  holes 
of  the  iron  quite  glow  inside,  and  thus  you  will  cease  to  fan. 
Waiting  then  about  half  an  hour  you  uncover  by  degrees 
until  you  remove  all  the  coals,  and  you  will  again  wait  until 
the  holes  of  the  iron  grow  black  inside,  and  so  raising  the 
iron  by  the  handle,  you  place  it,  covered  as  it  is,  in  the  furnace, 
behind,  in  a  corner  until  it  has  become  quite  cold.  Then 
opening  it  you  take  out  the  enamel  and  will  wash  it,  and  will 
again  fill  it  and  melt  as  before,  and  you  do  thus  until,  melted 
equally  everywhere,  it  has  become  full.  In  this  manner  you 
compose  the  remaining  pieces. 


CHAPTER  LV. 

OF  POLISHING  THE  COLOURED  GLASS  ORNAMENT,  (OR 
ENAMEL.) 

This  being  done,  take  a  piece  of  wax  the  length  of  half  a 
thumb,  in  which  you  will  fix  the  enamel  so  that  the  wax  may 
be  all  round  it;  by  this  wax  you  will  hold  it\  Then  you  will 
rub  it  for  a  long  time  upon  a  hard  and  smooth  hone,  until  it 

'  "  and  you  will  rub  this  electrum  upon  a  smooth  sandy  stone  carefully  with  water, 
until  the  gold  appear  equally  everywhere."    From  the  Wolfenhuttel  MS. 


284 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


piat;  sicque  super  eandem  cotem  saliva  hiimidam  fricabis 
partem  lateris,  quse  ex  antiquis  vasculis  fractee  reperiuntur, 
donee  saliva  spissa  et  rubea  fiat ;  quam  linies  super  tabulam 
plumbeam  sequalem,  super  quam  leniter  fricabis  electrum 
usque  dum  colores  ejus  translucidi  fiant  et  clari;  rursumque 
fricabis  laterem  cum  saliva  super  cotem,  et  linies  super  corium 
hyrcinum,  tabulee  lignese  sequaliter  affixum  ;  super  quod  polies 
ipsum  electrum  donee  omnino  fulgeat,  ita  ut  si  dimidia  pars 
ejus  humida  fiat  et  dimidia  sicca  sit,  nullus  possit  considerare, 
quae  pars  sicca,  quae  vel  humida  sit. 


CAPUT  LVL 

DE  PEDE  CALICIS  ET  PATENA  ATQUE  FISTULA. 

DEINDE  funde  aurum  in  quo  formabis  pedem  cum  nodo, 
in  cujus  nodi  medio  atque  in  ora  pedis  in  circuitu  dis- 
pones limbum  cum  lapidibus  et  electris  ut  supra.  Patenam 
quoque  cum  formabis^  mensura  et  forma,  qua  volueris,  circa 
Oram  ejus  eodem  opere  et  ordine  limbum  operaberis,  facies  et 
fistulam  auream  ordine  et  modo  quo  superius  argenteam. 

Cruces  quoque  et  plenaria  et  sanctorum  pignorum  scrinia, 
simili  forma  cum  lapidibus  et  margaritis^  deornabis. 


CAPUT  LVII. 

DE  COLATORIO. 

FACIES  quoque  colatorium  aureum  sive  argenteum  hoc 
modo.  Percute  vas  parvulum  ad  simihtudinem  modicae 
pelvis,  latitudine  modice  amplius  unius  palmse^,  (cui  impones 
caudam  longitudinis  unius  ulnee  et)  latitudine  unius  pollicis, 

'  imb  "  formaveris." 

*  "  atque  electris/'  in  Cod.  Gitelph. 

^  Ex  Cod.  Otieli^h.  desunt  iii  Manuscripto  Harleo. 


TRANSLATION. 


285 


acquires  a  polish ;  and  you  will  also  rub  upon  the  same  stone, 
wetted  with  saliva,  a  piece  of  potter's  ware,  which  is  found 
amongst  the  fragments  of  ancient  vases,  until  the  saliva  has 
become  thick  and  red ;  this  you  anoint  upon  a  flat  leaden 
tablet,  upon  which  you  will  lightly  rub  the  glass  stone  until 
at  length  their  colours  appear  transparent  and  clear  :  and  you 
will  again  rub  the  clay  ware  upon  the  hone  with  sahva, 
and  you  anoint  it  upon  a  goat  skin,  smoothly  fixed  upon  a 
wooden  table ;  upon  this  you  polish  this  electrum  until  it 
shines  perfectly,  so  as  if  one  half  of  it  were  wet  and  one  half 
were  dry,  no  one  could  distinguish  which  was  the  wet  or 
which  the  dry  part. 


CHAPTER  LVI. 

OF  THE  FOOT  OF  THE  CHALICE,  THE  PATENA,  AND  THE 

PIPE. 

Then  melt  the  gold  of  which  you  will  form  the  foot  with  the 
knot,  in  the  centre  of  which  knot  and  in  the  rim  of  the  foot 
around,  you  arrange  the  border  with  stones  and  glass  gems  as 
above.  Also  when  you  have  formed  the  patena  in  the  size 
and  shape  you  may  wish,  and  shall  have  fashioned  a  border 
around  its  rim  in  the  same  work  and  order,  you  make  the 
golden  pipe  in  the  same  order  and  manner  as  the  silver  (pipe) 
above  mentioned.  You  will  also  decorate  crosses  and  caskets 
and  shrines  of  holy  relics  in  a  similar  fashion  with  stones  and 
pearls  \ 


CHAPTER  LVII. 

OF  THE  STRAINER. 

You  also  make  a  golden  or  silver  strainer  in  this  manner. 
Beat  out  a  small  cup  like  a  small  basin,  in  length  rather  more 
than  a  palm,  (Ho  which  you  place  a  handle  a  yard  in  length) 

'  "  and  enamels/'  Wolfenbiittel  MS.,  is  added. 
2  From  the  Wolfenbuttel  MS. 


286 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


quae  cauda  habebit  in  siimmitate  caput  leonis  fusile  et  decen- 
tissime  sculptum,  quod  caput  tenebit  pelviculam  in  ore  suo. 
Habebit  etiam  in  altera  summitate  caput  simili  modo  sculptum, 
in  cujus  ore  pendebit  anulus,  per  inserto  digito  portari  possit. 
Reliqua  vero  cauda  inter  duo  capita  decorari  debet  nigello  per 
loca,  et  per  loca  opere  fusili  et  punctorio  et  litteris  versuum 
exarari  in  suo  loco.  Pelvicula  vero  quse  in  summitate  est,  in 
medio  fundo  perforari  debet,  latitudine  duorum  digitorum  in 
rotunditate,  subtilissimis  foraminibus  per  quae  colari  debet 
vinum  et  aqua  in  calicem  ponenda,  per  quam  ^  sacramentum 
Dominici  sanguinis  conficitur. 


CAPUT  LVIIL 

DE  AMPULLA. 

SI  vero  volueris  ampullam  componere  ad  fundendum  vinum, 
percute  argentum  eodem  modo,  quo  percutitur  nodus 
pedis  in  calice,  excepto  quod  venter  ampullae  multo  latior  debet 
formari,  et  collum  ejus  super  incudem  longam  et  gracilem 
malleo  corneo  et  mediocri  ferreo  debet  constringi.  Interdum 
etiam  ipsa  ampulla,  cum  coeperit  formari,  impleatur  cera  et 
malleo  mediocri  ferreo  leniter  percutiatur,  ut  ei  rotunditas  ven- 
tris  et  effigies  colli  decentius  et  sequalius  aptetur.  Sicque 
ejecta  cera  super  carbones  iterum  recoquatur,  et  denuo  cera 
imponatur,  ac  sicut  prius  percutiatur,  donee  omnino  formetur. 
Quo  facto  si  volueris  in  ipsa  ampulla  imagines  aut  bestias  sive 
flores  opere  ductili  facere,  compone  in  primis  confectionem 
ex  pice  et  cera  et  tegula. 

*  Codex  Guelph.,  "  quae,"  hahet ;  i.  e.  vinum  et  aqua. 


TRANSLATION. 


287 


and  the  breadth  of  a  thumb,  which  handle  will  have  a  lion's 
head  at  the  extremity,  cast  and  properly  sculptured,  which 
head  will  hold  the  small  basin  in  his  mouth.  It  will  also 
have  at  the  other  end  a  head  carved  in  a  similar  manner,  in 
the  mouth  of  which  a  ring  will  hang,  by  means  of  which  it 
can  be  carried,  the  finger  being  inserted.  The  remainder  of 
the  handle  between  the  two  heads  should  be  decorated  in 
places  with  niello,  and  in  places  be  ornamented  with  molten 
and  point  work  and  letters  of  verses  in  their  places.  The 
small  cup,  which  is  at  the  extremity,  should  be  perforated  at 
bottom  in  the  centre,  of  the  size  of  two  fingers  in  circumfer- 
ence, with  very  fine  holes,  through  which  the  wine  and  the 
water  to  be  placed  in  the  chalice  should  run,  by  means  of 
which  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  blood  is  accomphshed. 


CHAPTER  LVIII. 

OF  THE  VIAL. 

But  if  you  wish  to  make  the  vial  for  pouring  out  the  wine, 
beat  the  silver  in  the  same  manner  as  the  knot  of  the  foot  of 
the  chalice  is  beaten,  excepting  that  the  body  of  the  vial 
should  be  formed  much  wider,  and  its  neck  be  narrowed  upon 
a  long  and  slender  anvil  with  the  moderate-sized  horned  and 
iron  hammer.  Sometimes  also  the  vial,  when  its  formation 
has  commenced,  may  be  filled  with  wax,  and  be  lightly  struck 
with  the  middhng  iron  hammer,  that  the  roundness  of  the 
body  and  the  shape  of  the  neck  may  be  more  properly  and 
evenly  trimmed.  And  thus,  the  wax  being  taken  out,  it  may 
again  be  re-heated  upon  the  coals,  and  the  wax  again  be  put 
in,  and  it  may  be  beaten  as  before  until  it  is  altogether  formed. 
Which  being  done,  if  you  wish  to  make  upon  the  vial  figures, 
or  animals,  or  flowers  in  beaten  work,  first  compose  the  mix- 
ture of  pitch  and  wax  and  tile. 


288 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  LIX. 

DE  CONFECTIONE  QVM  DICITUR  TENAX. 

TERE  partem  laterls  sive  tegulse  minutissime,  et  liquefac 
picem  in  testa  ollse,  modicumque  ceraB  adde.  Quibus 
pariter  liquefactis  commisce  pulverem  tegulse  et  fortiter  corn- 
move  atque  in  aquam  efFunde.  Cumque  cceperit  refrigerari, 
intingue  manus  utrasque  in  aquam  et  macera  diu,  donee  pos- 
sis  ipsam  confectionem  extend  ere  et  trahere  sicut  pellem. 
Hanc  confectionem  statim  liquefacies  et  implebis  ampullam 
usque  ad  summum.  Cumque  refrigerata  fuerit,  pertrahe  in 
ventre  et  in  coUo  quodcumque  volueris,  tollensque  ferros  duc- 
torios  graciles  et  parvulum  malleolum  designa  quod  pertrax- 
isti,  in  circuitu,  leniter  percutiendo.  Deinde  da  puero,  qui 
contra  te  sedat,  malleolum  et  tu  tene  in  sinistra  manu  am- 
pullam, et  dextera  ferros,  unumquodque  in  suo  loco,  et  fac 
puerum  percutere  quocumque  modo  volueris,  leniter  aut  forti- 
ter, ac  depone  campos,  ut  cavi  fiant  et  opus  elevetur.  Cum- 
que per  omnia  semel  percusseris,  apposita  ampulla  igni,  eice 
confectionem,  recoctaque  ampulla,  ejecta  ab  igne,  rursum 
imple  eam,  ac  sicut  prius  percute  sicque  facies  donee  omnes 
campos  sequaliter  deponas,  et  omne  opus  ita  conformes  ut  ap- 
pareat  quasi  fusum  sit.  Hoc  autem  omnino  procura  ut  ar- 
gentum  ampullae  ita  spissum  sit,  ut  cum  opus  percutiendo 
formaveris,  cum  ferris  fossoriis  possis  illud  decenter  incidere, 
fodere  et  radere.  Quo  peracto,  si  volueris,  fac  auriculam  fu- 
silem  eodem  modo  quo  formasti  auriculas  argentei  calicis,  et 
in  anteriori  parte  deductorium,  unde  vinum  effundatur,  quae 
confirm abis  solidatura,  argento  et  cupro  mixta,  ut  supra. 
Deinde,  ubicumque  volueris,  nigello  ornabis,  et  reliquum  deau- 
rabis  ut  supra. 

Eodem  modo  facies  cyphos  aureos  et  argenteos  atque  scul- 
tellas,  et  pixides  ad  oblatas  imponendas  et  capsulas  thymia- 
matis ;  et  manubria  in  cultellis,  et  imagines  in  crucibus  et  ple- 
nariis  ex  auro  sive  argento  aut  cupro. 


TRANSLATION. 


289 


CHAPTER  LIX. 

OF  THE  COMPOSITION  WHICH  IS  CALLED  TENAX. 

Grind  a  piece  of  brick  or  tile  very  small,  and  melt  some 
pitch  in  an  earthenware  pot  and  add  a  little  wax.  These 
being  melted  together,  mingle  the  powder  of  the  tile,  and 
stir  it  strongly  and  pour  it  into  water.    And  when  it  has  be- 
gun to  grow  cold,  dip  both  hands  into  the  water  and  mace- 
rate it  for  a  long  time,  until  you  can  extend  and  draw  out  this 
composition  like  a  skin.    You  instantly  melt  this  composition 
and  will  fill  the  vial  to  the  top.    And  when  it  has  become 
cold,  portray  in  the  body  and  in  the  neck  whatever  you  wish, 
and  taking  slender  ductile  instruments  and  a  small  hammer, 
design  that  which  you  have  portrayed  around  it,  by  striking 
lightly.    Then  give  the  hammer  to  the  boy,  who  may  sit 
opposite  you,  and  hold  the  vial  in  your  left  hand,  and  the  in- 
struments in  your  right,  each  one  in  his  place;  and  make 
the  boy  strike  them  in  what  mode  you  please,  slightly  or 
strongly,  and  depress  the  grounds  that  they  may  become 
hollow,  and  the  work  be  raised.    And  when  you  have  beaten 
it  once  throughout,  the  vial  being  brought  to  the  fire,  eject  the 
composition,  and  the  vial  being  reheated  and  taken  from  the 
fire  again,  fill  it  and  beat  as  before,  and  do  thus  until  you  de- 
press all  the  grounds  equally,  and  you  fashion  all  the  work, 
so  that  it  may  appear  as  if  cast.    Above  all  arrange  that  the 
silver  of  the  vial  be  so  thick  that  when  you  have  formed  the 
work  by  beating,  you  may  be  able  to  chase,  hollow,  and  scrape 
it  properly  with  the  sculping  instruments.    Which  being  ac- 
complished, if  you  wish,  make  the  cast  handle  in  the  same 
manner  as  you  formed  the  handles  of  the  silver  chahce,  and 
the  spout  where  the  wine  is  poured  out ;  these  you  will  fasten 
with  solder,  made  with  silver  and  copper  as  above.  Then 
you  will  ornament  with  niello  wherever  you  may  wish,  and 
gild  the  remainder  as  above. 

You  make  in  the  same  manner  gold  and  silver  cups  and 
plates  and  boxes  for  placing  the  wafers  and  incense  caskets ; 
also  handles  for  knives  and  figures  upon  crosses  and  missals 
in  gold,  or  silver,  or  copper. 

u 


290 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  LX. 


DE  THURIBULO  DUCTILI. 


SI  vero  thuribula  ductili  opere  componere  volueris  in  auro, 
vel  argento,  sive  cupro,  primum  purificabis  ordine  quo 
supra,  atque  fuiides  in  fusoriis  ferris  duas  marcas  vel  tres  sive 
quatuor,  secundum  quantitatem  quam  vis  habere  superiorem 
partem  thuribuli.  Deinde  attenuabis  in  rotulam  eo  ordine 
quo  superius  calicem  argenteum  majorem,  excepto  quod  hoc 
opus  spissius  et  profundius  ducendum  est  interius,  ut  altius 
sit  exterius,  ita  ut  altitudo  in  se  ipsius  latitudinem  totam 
habeat  et  ejus  medietatem.  Cujus  altitudinem  cum  produxeris, 
priusquam  latitudinem  constringas,  pertrahe  in  eo  turres,  vide- 
licet in  supremo  unam  octoangulatam,  in  qua  fiant  ejusdem 
numeri  fenestrse,  sub  qua  fiant  quatuor  quadrat'cfi,  quibus 
singulis  imponantur  tres  columpnae,  et  inter  eas  duse  fenestrae 
productee,  in  quarum  medio  super  mediam  columnam  fiat 
fenestella  rotunda ;  sub  quibus  in  tertio  loco  formentur  alise 
turres  octo  ;  quatuor  videlicet  rotundas  contra  superiores 
quadras,  in  quibus  fiant  flosculi  aut  aviculse  vel  bestiolse,  sive 
fenestellse,  et  inter  eas  quatuor  quadrse,  quae  et  latiores  sint, 
in  quibus  fiant  dimidise  imagines  angelorum,  quasi  in  eis  cum 
alis  suis  sedentium.  Sub  quibus  in  ipsa  rotunditate  vasis 
fiant  quatuor  arcus  in  supremo  modice  producti,  in  quibus 
fiant  evangehstse  sive  in  specie  angelorum,  sen  in  figura  ani- 
malium ;  inter  quos  arcus  super  ipsam  oram  rotunditatis 
ponantur  quatuor  capita  leonum  sive  hominum  fiisilia,  per 
quse  catenae  transeant.  His  ita  pertractis,  cum  ferris  ductoriis 
et  malleis,  interius  et  exterius  percutiantur,  donee  omnino 
fi)rmentur,  sicque  limentur  et  radentur,  ferrisque  fossoriis 
fodiantur.  Hsec  est  superior  pars  turibuh.  Deinde  percu- 
tiatur  inferior  cum  suo  pede,  in  quo  fiant  quatuor  arcus,  qui 
respondeant  superioribus,  in  quibus  sedeant  quatuor  flumina 


TRANSLATION. 


291 


CHAPTER  LX. 

OF  THE  BEATEN  CENSER. 

If  however  you  should  wish  to  make  a  censer  in  beaten  work, 
in  gold,  silver,  or  brass,  you  will  first  purify  it  in  the  above 
order,  and  you  pour  into  the  iron  moulds,  two,  or  three,  or 
four  marks,  according  to  the  quantity  which  you  wish  the 
upper  portion  of  the  censer  to  possess.  You  will  then  thin  it 
in  a  circle  in  the  same  way  as  the  larger  silver  chalice  above 
mentioned,  excepting,  that  this  work  is  thicker  and  is  to  be 
depressed  deeper  inside,  that  it  may  be  higher  outside,  so  that 
its  height  may  possess  the  whole  of  its  breadth  and  one  half 
of  it.  When  you  have  lengthened  out  its  height,  before  you 
limit  the  breadth,  portray  towers  in  it,  namely,  on  the  top, 
one  octangular,  in  which  the  same  number  of  windows  are 
made ;  under  which  four  square  towers  are  made,  upon  every 
one  of  which  three  columns  are  placed,  and  between  them 
two  lengthened  windows,  in  the  midst  of  which,  over  the 
middle  column,  a  small  round  window  is  made :  under  these, 
in  the  third  place,  eight  other  towers  are  made ;  namely,  four 
round,  against  the  upper  squares,  in  which  are  made  small 
flowers,  or  birds,  or  animals,  or  small  windows,  and  between 
these  four  square  (towers)  which  may  be  yet  broader,  in 
which  the  half  figures  of  angels  are  made,  as  if  resting  in 
them  with  their  wings.  Under  which,  in  the  rounding  itself 
of  the  vase,  four  arches  are  made,  a  little  drawn  out  at  the 
top,  in  which  are  made  the  evangelists,  whether  in  likeness 
of  angels,  or  in  figures  of  animals ;  between  these  arches, 
upon  the  edge  of  the  rounding,  four  heads  of  lions  are  placed, 
or  of  men,  cast,  through  which  the  chains  may  pass.  These 
things  thus  portrayed,  they  are  struck  out  with  the  ductile 
and  hammering  irons,  inside  and  outside,  until  they  are 
altogether  shaped,  and  are  thus  filed  and  rasped  and  chased 
with  the  sculping  instruments.  This  is  the  upper  part  of  the 
censer.  Then  the  lower  part  with  its  foot  is  struck  out,  in 
which  four  arches  are  made  which  may  correspond  to  those 
above,  in  which  may  rest  the  four  rivers  of  Paradise,  in  human 

u  2 


292 


THEOPHILT  LTBER  HI. 


Paradysi  humana  specie  cum  suis  amphoris,  quibus  efFundatur 
quasi  species  fluentis  aquae.  In  angulis  vero,  quibus  con- 
junguntur  circuli,  figantur  capita  leonum  sive  facies  hominum 
de  quibus  supra  diximus,  ita  ut  inferiori  parte  adhaereant 
facies  in  quibus  firmentur  catenae,  et  in  superiori  capilli  vel 
comae,  per  quas  transeant  ipsae  catenae.  Quod  si  pes  cum 
ipsa  inferiori  parte  nequeat  percuti,  fiat  singulariter  sive 
ductili  sive  fusili  opere,  et  imponatur  cum  solidatura  argento 
et  cupro  mixta,  de  qua  supra  diximus.  Lylium  vero  cui 
anulus  imponendus  est,  et  cui  catenae  superius  infigendae  sunt, 
fiat  similiter  ductili  sive  fusili  opere,  in  quo  formentur  flores 
aut  aviculae  sive  bestiolae  secundum  qualitatem  inferioris 
operis.  Hoc  turibulum  si  fuerit  argenteum  aut  cupreum, 
poterit  deaurari  ordine  quo  supra.  Quod  si  quis  voluerit 
laborem  apponere,  ut  turibulum  pretiosioris  operis  componat, 
similitudinem  civitatis,  quam  vidit  propheta  in  monte,  hoc 
modo  exprimere  poterit. 


CAPUT  LXI. 

DE  THURIBULO  FUSILI. 

TOLLE  argillam  non  commixtam  et  bene  maceratam,  etfac 
siccare  ad  solem,  siccat^imque  comminue  et  diligenter 
cribra.  Cribratamque  aqua  commisce  et  fortiter  macera,  et 
exinde  compone  tibi  duas  massas,  ad  magnitudinem  quam  vis, 
habere  turibulum,  unam  inferiorem,  et  alteram  superiorem 
quae  ^  latior  erit ;  quae  massae  vocantur  nuclei.  Quos  statim 
perforabis  Hgno  in  longitudine  in  quatuor  costis  aequahter  in- 
ciso,  sicque  siccabis  ad  solem.  Post  haec  transduces  eis 
ferrum,  quod  dicitur  tornatile,  longum  et  mediocriter  gracile, 
quod  sit  in  una  summitate  grossius  in  quatuor  costis  aequa- 
liter  percussum,  ac  magis  magisque  gracile  deductim  usque 
in  finem,  in  cujus  grossiori  parte  inponatur  aliud  ferrum 


'  "altior"  in  Cod.  Guelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


293 


form  with  their  urns,  from  which  may  be  poured  a  Hkeness 
of  flowing  water.  In  the  angles,  by  which  the  circles  are 
joined  together,  the  heads  of  lions,  or  human  faces,  of  which 
we  have  before  spoken,  may  be  fixed,  so  that  the  faces  may 
adhere  in  the  lower  part  in  which  the  chains  are  fixed,  and  in 
the  upper,  the  manes  or  hair  through  which  these  chains  may 
pass.  But  if  the  foot  cannot  be  beaten  with  the  lower  part 
itself,  it  is  made  alone,  in  cast  or  beaten  work,  and  can  be 
placed  on  with  the  solder  made  with  silver  and  copper,  of 
which  we  have  before  spoken.  Also  the  lily,  to  which  the 
ring  is  attached  and  to  which  the  chains  are  fixed  above,  is 
similarly  made  with  ductile  or  molten  work,  in  which  flowers, 
or  small  birds  or  beasts  are  formed,  according  to  the  quality 
of  the  labour  below.  If  this  censer  be  silver  or  brass,  it  can 
be  gilt  in  the  manner  before  mentioned. 

But  should  any  one  wish  to  apply  more  labour,  so  as  to 
compose  a  censer  of  more  costly  work,  he  can,  after  this 
manner  express  the  hkeness  of  the  city  which  the  prophet 
saw  upon  the  mount. 


CHAPTER  LXI. 

OF  THE  CAST  CENSER. 

Take  clay,  unmixed  and  well  beaten,  and  dry  it  in  the  sun, 
and  being  dry,  carefully  grind  and  sift  it.  Being  sifted,  mix 
it  with  water,  and  beat  it  strongly,  and  make  two  masses  of 
it  of  the  size  which  you  wish  the  censer  to  possess,  one  lower, 
and  another  upper  (mass)  which  will  be  wider ;  these  lumps 
are  called  the  "  nuclei."  You  will  directly  pierce  these  with 
a  piece  of  wood  cut  lengthwise,  smoothly  upon  the  four 
sides,  and  will  thus  dry  them  in  the  sun.  Afterwards  pass 
an  iron  through  them,  which  is  called  the  turning  iron,  long  and 
rather  slender,  which  is  thicker  at  one  end,  smoothly  beaten 
on  the  four  sides,  and  diminishing  more  and  more  slenderly 
towards  the  point ;  in  the  thicker  part  of  this  another  iron 


294 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


breve  et  curvum,  sive  lignum,  cum  quo  possit  circumveiti. 
Deinde  habebis  duas  columnellas  ligneas  super  scamnum 
fixas  et  abinvicem  sejunctas  secundum  longitudinem  ferri,  quae 
singulae  habeant  in  anteriori  parte  singulos  clavos  similiter 
ligneos,  ad  mensuram  palmi  longos,  et  ad  similitudinem  gra- 
dus  incisos;  super  quos  ponatur  lignum  aliud  rotund um,  ita 
ut  possit  propius  et  longius  removeri,  super  quod  requiescat 
manus  tornantis.  His  ita  compositis  inter  ipsas  duas  colump- 
nellas  pone  ferrum  tornatile,  quod  nucleos  continet,  et  coram 
te  ad  Isevam  raanum  sedente  adjutore,  qui  circumvertat  illud, 
tornabis  ferris  acutis  et  latioribus  ex  omni  parte  usque  ad 
aequalitatem,  sicque  formabis  nucleos  illos  ut  sibi  conjungan- 
tur  sequali  latitudine  et  spissitudine  in  medio.  Intercides 
vero  inferiorem  partem  a  medietate  inferius,  ita,  ut  latitudo 
superior  duabus  mensuris  inferiorem  superet,  in  qua  formabis 
et  pedem.  Eadem  quoque  mensura  intercides  superiorem 
partem,  cujus  tamen  altitudo  tanta  erit,  ut  intercidatur '  ad 
similitudinem  lignei  campanarii,  ita  ut  quselibet  incisura  sur- 
sum  magis  gracilis  sit.  His  ita  tornatis  eice  ferrum,  et  cum 
cultello  incide  in  latiori  limbo  superioris  nuclei  quatuor  angu- 
los  usque  ad  incisuram,  quae  ei  proxima  est,  ita  ut  in  crucis 
modum  formetur,  et  unumquodque  cornu  sequales  habeat  lati- 
tudines  in  parietibus,  sed  altitudine  contineat  mensuram  et 
dimidiam  latitudinis;  in  qua  etiam  pinnacula  ad  similitudi- 
nem tectorum  formabis.  Facies  quoque  in  proxima  turri 
octo  costas,  quatuor  latiores,  et  quatuor  strictiores  quas  etiam 
rotundas  facies,  ita  ut  anguli  latiorum  promineant,  et  stricti- 
orum  cavi  sint,  ut  sic  rotunditas  appareat ;  in  quibus  ad 
mensuram  tecta  convenientia  formabis.  Turrem  vero  penul- 
timam  eodem  modo  formabis,  sicut  tamen  ut  rotundse  costae 
super  inferioris  latas  formentur,  et  inferioris  rotundae  sub  su- 
periorum  latis  aptentur.  Superior  vero  turris  octo  costis 
oequaliter  latis  et  absque  tectis  formetur.  Heec  erit  superior 
pars  turibuli. 


'  "  ter  "  in  Cod.  Guelph.  inierponilur. 


TRANSLATION. 


295 


short  and  bent,  must  be  fixed  on,  or  a  piece  of  wood,  with 
which  it  can  be  revolved.    You  will  then  have  two  small 
wooden  columns  fixed  upon  a  bench  and  separated  from  each 
other  according  to  the  length  of  the  iron,  each  of  which  may 
have  in  the  front  part  single  wedges,  also  wooden,  in  measure 
a  palm  in  length,  and  cut  like  a  ladder ;  upon  which  another 
round  wood  may  be  placed,  so  that  it  can  be  moved  nearer  or 
farther :  upon  this  the  hand  of  the  turner  can  rest.  These 
things  thus  arranged  place,  between  these  two  columns  the 
turning  iron  which  holds  the  "  nucleus,"  and  the  assistant 
who  may  turn  it  sitting  before  you  upon  the  left  hand,  you 
will  turn  it  with  sharp  and  wide  instruments  everywhere  until 
it  is  smooth,  and  you  will  so  form  these  "nuclei"  that  they  may 
be  joined  together  by  an  equal  breadth  and  thickness  in  the 
middle.    You  will  cut  in  the  lower  part  from  the  middle 
downwards,  so  that  the  upper  breadth  may  by  two  measures 
exceed  the  lower,  in  which  you  will  also  form  the  foot.  In 
the  same  proportion  also  you  cut  the  upper  part,  the  height 
of  which,  however,  will  be  such  that  it  is  cut  in  (three  times), 
to  the  shape  of  a  bell-founder's  wooden  (block),  so  that  every 
cutting  may  be  shghter  upwards.    These  being  thus  turned, 
take  out  the  iron,  and  with  a  knife  cut,  in  the  broader  border 
of  the  upper  nucleus,  four  angles  as  far  as  the  nearest  cutting, 
so  that  it  may  be  formed  in  the  manner  of  a  cross,  and  let 
each  projection  have  equal  breadth  in  the  sides,  but  contain 
in  height  a  measure  and  a  half  of  the  breadth,  in  which  you 
will  form  also  small  pinnacles  in  likeness  of  roofs.    You  also 
make  in  the  next  tower  eight  ribs,  four  wide  and  four  narrow, 
which  you  also  make  round,  so  that  the  angles  of  the  wider 
may  project,  and  of  the  narrower  be  hollow,  so  that  a  round- 
ness may  appear ;  in  these  you  will  form  proper  roofs  to  the 
size.    You  will  fashion  the  penultimate  tower  in  the  same 
manner,  so,  however,  that  round  ribs  are  formed  over  the 
broad  parts  of  the  lower,  and  that  the  round  parts  of  the 
lower  are  adjusted  under  the  broad  parts  of  the  upper.  But 
the  upper  tower  must  be  formed  with  eight  ribs,  equally  broad 
and  without  roofs.    This  will  be  the  upper  part  of  the  censer. 

'  "  three  times,"  from  the  Wolfenbuiiel  MS. 


296 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


297 


In  the  lower  part  a  wider  border  will  be  formed,  the  angles 
being  likewise  cut  in  form  of  a  cross,  that  it  may  be  fitted  to 
the  upper,  and  a  lower  border  is  defined  around.  These 
being  thus  adjusted,  take  two  pieces  of  wood  a  foot  in  length 
and  the  thickness  which  you  wish  the  wax  to  possess,  and 
another  wood  of  equal  length,  round  and  thick  as  the  stem 
of  a  lance ;  and  you  will  have  a  small  tablet  a  foot  wide  and 
two  yards  long  and  very  smooth ;  upon  this  you  fix  the  two 
pieces  of  wood  before  mentioned,  so  that  being  separated 
from  each  other  by  the  space  of  half  a  foot,  wood  may  be 
evenly  adjusted  against  wood.  Then  take  pure  wax  which, 
placed  near  the  fire,  you  will  strongly  pound,  and,  thus  warm, 
you  will  place  it  upon  the  table  between  the  two  woods, 
water  being  first  apphed  that  they  may  not  adhere ;  and  pass- 
ing over  it  the  wetted  round  wood  strongly  with  both  hands, 
you  will  thin  it  according  to  the  thickness  of  the  pieces  of 
wood.  And  when  you  have  prepared  many  even  pieces  of 
wax,  sitting  near  the  fire,  cut  them  small  according  to  the 
spaces  which  you  had  cut  in  the  clay  of  the  censer,  and  you 
will  adjust  to  each  space  its  piece  sHghtly  warmed,  and  with 
an  iron,  fit  for  this  work,  and  made  warm,  you  will  solder  it 
round.  And  when  you  have  covered  in  this  manner  all  the 
"  nuclei "  outside,  take  a  thin  iron,  sharp  on  both  sides  like  a 
slender  arrow  with  a  small  handle,  fixed  in  a  wooden  handle, 
and  with  this  cut  it  round  everywhere,  and  you  will  smooth  it 
with  box-wood  made  in  the  same  fashion,  and  you  will  take 
care  that  the  wax  be  in  no  place  thicker  or  thinner  tban  in 
another.  Then  portray  single  arches  in  each  front  and  the 
like  upon  the  side  walls,  and  single  folding  doors  under  each 
arch  on  every  side,  so  that  each  folding  door  may  cover  a 
fourth  part  of  the  space,  and  that  two  parts  may  remain  in 
the  middle ;  in  these  spaces  under  each  arch,  you  trace  single 
figures  of  the  apostles,  each  of  which  may  hold  a  writing  of 
the  pattern  you  wish ;  you  will  write  their  names  in  the  border 
around  the  arches.  In  the  triangular  spaces,  which  support 
the  pinnacles  of  the  roof,  you  will  fashion  a  representation  of 
twelve  stones,  distributing  a  proper  stone  to  each  apostle  ac- 
cording to  the  signification  of  its  name ;  the  names  of  these 


298 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


299 


you  write  in  the  lower  border  of  the  same  space,  and  in  each 
angle,  next  the  stones,  you  make  small  windows.  This  will  be 
a  likeness  of  which  the  prophet  says  :  "  On  the  East  three 
gates ;  on  the  North  three  gates ;  on  the  South  three  gates ; 
and  on  the  West  three  gates."  In  the  four  angles  which  are 
between  the  divisions  of  the  doors,  you  will  form  single  round 
turrets,  through  which  the  chains  will  pass.  These  things 
thus  disposed,  you  make  on  the  top  of  the  upper  tower,  in  the 
square  spaces,  single  entire  figures  of  angels,  (with  their 
shields  and  lances  as  if  standing  on  guard  upon  the  walls,  and 
in  the  round  turrets  you  will  fashion  small  columns  with  their 
capitals  and  bases.  In  the  same  manner  you  make  in  the  last 
tower  but  one,  which  is  shorter,  half  images  of  angels,  and  in 
the  same  way  of  columns.  And  in  the  upper  tower,  which 
will  be  more  slender,  you  make  long  and  rounded  windows, 
and  on  the  top  of  the  towers  bulwarks  around ;  in  the  middle 
of  these  you  will  fashion  a  lamb,  and  upon  its  head  a  crown 
and  cross,  and  about  its  back  a  small  arch,  in  the  top  of  which 
a  ring  must  be,  to  which  the  middle  chain  is  fixed.  This  is 
the  upper  part  of  the  censer  with  its  work. 

In  the  lower  part,  similarly  covered  with  wax,  you  will  form 
in  each  space  single  figures  of  the  prophets  with  their  writ- 
ings, and  will  adapt  to  each  apostle  a  corresponding  prophet, 
that  their  testimonies,  which  are  inscribed  upon  the  scrolls, 
may  agree  with  each  other  \)  But  you  make  no  doors  around 
the  prophets,  but  only  let  the  spaces  be  quadrangular  and 
their  names  be  written  upon  the  borders  over  their  heads. 
You  also  make  in  the  angles  four  towers,  in  which  the  chains 
are  fixed  that  they  may  be  fitted  with  those  higher  up.  In 
the  lower  round  space  you  make  as  many  circles  as  you  can 
or  wish,  in  which  you  form  single  feminine  half  figures  of  the 
virtues,  the  names  of  which  you  write  in  the  circles.  At  the 
last  also  you  will  fashion  and  turn  the  foot,  and  all  the  spaces 
about  the  figures  above  and  below  will  be  transpierced. 
Then,  the  tunnels  and  air  holes  being  placed  in  every  part, 
you  plaster  thin  clay  carefully  about  it,  and  will  dry  it  in  the 
sun,  and  you  do  this  again,  and  a  third  time ;  these  parts  are 

^  The  text  witkin  these  brackets  is  taken  from  Les&htg's  Ed.  of  the  Wolfcnhuttel 
MS.,  hi)  the  scribe  omitted  here. 


300 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


jam  formee.  Quas  omnino  siccatas  pones  ad  ignem,  et  cum 
calefactee  fuerint,  ceram  liquescentem  funde  in  aquam,  rursum- 
que  pone  ad  ignem,  sicque  facies  donee  ceram  omnino  eicias. 
Post  hsec  in  loco  apto  et  aequali  pones  carbones  grossos  et 
frigidos,  super  quos  stabilies  formas,  foraminibus  inferius  con- 
versis,  et  circumpones  eis  lapides  duros,  qui  resilire  non  pos- 
sint  ad  calorem  ignis,  et  ordinabis  eos  lapidem  super  lapidem 
in  similitudinem  muri  absque  temperamento  siccos,  ita  ut  inter 
lapides  multa  foramina  et  parvula  remaneant.  Quibus  ita 
compositis,  altius  quam  formse  sint  spatio  dimidii  pedis,  cir- 
cumfunde  carbones  ardentes,  ac  deinde  frigidos  usque  ad 
sum  mum,  et  cave  ut  tantum  spatii  sit  inter  formas  et  lapides, 
quod  carbones  capere  possit.  Cumque  carbones  omnes  incan- 
duerint,  interdum  gracili  ligno  movendi  sunt  circumquoque  per 
foramina  inter  lapides  ut  se  conjungant,  et  calor  ex  omni 
parte  sequalis  sit.  Et  cum  in  tantum  descenderint  ut  formas 
videre  possis,  iterum  imple  frigidis  carbonibus  usque  ad  sum- 
mum,  sicque  tertio  facies.  Et  cum  videris  formas  exterius 
candescere,  pone  vas  in  ignem  cum  auricalco  quod  fundere 
volueris,  et  primum  modice,  deinde  magis  magisque  sufflabis, 
donee  omnino  liquefiat.  Quo  facto  cum  curvo  ferro  et  in 
ligno  infixo  diligenter  commove,  et  vas  in  latus  aliud  con- 
verte;  rursumque  auricalco  imple  et  calefac,  sicque  facies 
donee  vas  plenum  fiat,  et  denuo  cum  curvo  ferro  commovebis, 
et  a  carbonibus  purgabis,  et  sufilatore  fortiter  flante  cooperies 
magnis  carbonibus.  Deinde  amotis  lapidibus  formas  eicies  ab 
igne,  et  argillam  abundanter  aqua  perfusam  atque  in  modum 
fecis  attenuatam  cum  panno  diligenter  circumlinies,  sicque 
juxta  fornacem,  in  quam  fundis,  fossa  facta  formas  inpone  et 
terram  circumquaque  exaggera,  et  ligno  inferius  sequali  cre- 
brius  inpingendo  diligenter  comprime.  Statimque  habeas 
prse  manibus  panniculum  multipliciter  complicatum  et  fisso 
ligno  impositum,  ejectoque  vassiculo  ab  igne  cum  forcipe  cur- 
vato  rostro,  et  panniculo  apposito,  qui  sordes  et  favillas  de- 


TRANSLATION. 


301 


now  called  moulds.    You  place  these,  perfectly  dry,  at  the 
fire,  and  when  they  have  become  warm,  pour  out  the  melted 
wax  mto  water,  and  you  again  place  them  at  the  fire,  and  you 
do  thus  until  you  have  removed  all  the  wax.    After  this  you 
lay  large  and  cold  coals  in  a  fit  and  smooth  place,  upon  which 
you  establish  the  moulds  with  the  openings  turned  down- 
wards, and  you  place  around  them  some  hard  stones  which 
cannot  fly  to  pieces  by  the  heat  of  the  fire,  and  you  will 
arrange  them  stone  upon  stone  like  a  wall,  dry  without  mor- 
tar, so  that  between  the  stones  many  small  openings  may  re- 
main.   These  being  thus  arranged,  higher  by  half  a  foot  than 
are  the  moulds,  spread  around  the  hot  coals,  and  then  the 
cold,  unto  the  top,  and  take  care  that  such  space  be  between 
the  moulds  and  the  stones  as  may  contain  the  coals.  When 
all  the  coals  are  glowing,  they  are  sometimes  to  be  stirred 
with  a  thin  wood  on  every  side  through  the  openings  between 
the  stones,  that  they  may  be  closed  together,  and  the  heat  be 
equal  everywhere.    And  when  they  have  descended  so  much 
that  you  can  see  the  moulds,  again  fill  up  to  the  top  with  cold 
coals,  and  do  thus  a  third  time.    And  when  you  see  the 
moulds  glow  outside,  place  the  vessel  in  the  fire  with  the 
brass  which  you  wish  to  cast,  and  you  will  blow  slightly  at 
first,  then  more  and  more  until  it  be  quite  liquefied.  This  being 
done,  carefully  stir  it  with  an  instrument  bent  and  fixed  in 
wood,  and  turn  it  into  another  wide  (vessel),  again  fill  it  with 
brass  and  heat  it,  and  do  thus  until  the  vessel  be  filled,  and 
you  will  again  stir  it  with  the  curved  instrument  and  will 
purge  it  from  coals,  and  blowing  strongly  with  the  bellows 
you  will  cover  it  with  large  coals.    The  stones  being  then 
removed,  you  take  the  moulds  from  the  fire  and  carefully 
plaster  clay,  plentifully  sprinkled  with  water  and  thinned  like 
lees,  with  a  cloth,  and  so  a  trough  being  made  near  the  fur- 
nace in  which  you  found,  you  place  in  the  moulds  and  heap 
up  earth  on  every  side  and  carefully  compress  it  with  a  piece 
of  wood  flat  at  the  bottom,  by  frequently  pounding  it.  And 
directly  have  ready  a  small  cloth  many  times  folded  and 
placed  in  a  piece  of  split  wood,  and  the  vessel  being  taken 
from  the  fire  with  the  pincers  curved  at  the  end,  and  the 
small  cloth  being  applied  which  can  defend  it  from  dust  and 


302 


THEOPHILI   LTBER  III. 


fendat,  diligenter  infunde.  Hoc  modo  formis  utrisqiie  fusis 
sine  stare,  donee  infusorium  superius  nigrescat;  deinde  re- 
mota  terra  et  a  fossis  extractas  repone  in  tuto  loco,  donee 
omnino  frigescant,  cavens  summopere  ne  calidis  formis  aquam 
supeijacias,  quia  interiores  nuclei,  si  humorem  persenserint, 
statim  inflantur  et  omne  opus  disrumpetur.  Cumque  per  se 
refrigeratis  argillam  removeris,  diligenter  circumspice,  et  si 
quid  negligentia  vel  casu  defuerit,  locum  ilium  circumliman- 
dum  attenuabis,  et  apposita  cera,  nec  non  argilla  addita,  cum 
sicca  fuerit,  calefacies,  sicque  superfundes,  donee  rivo  in 
partem  decurrente,  quod  superfundis  adh'dereat.  Quod  cum 
respexeris,  si  minus  firmum  fuerit,  cum  combustione  viniceae 
petrse,  et  limatura  ex  mixtura  argenti  et  cupri,  sicut  prsescrip- 
simus,  solidabis.  Post  heec  diversis  limis  quadrangulis,  trian- 
gulis,  atque  rotundis  campos  omnes  primo  translimabis. 
Deinde  ferris  fossoriis  fodies,  et  rasoriis  rades ;  ad  ultimum 
sabulo  cum  lignis  in  summitate  modice  conquassatis  undique 
purgatum  opus  deaurabis. 


CAPUT  LXIL 

DE  CATENIS\ 

CATENAS  facturus  primum  trahe  fila  subtilia  sive  gross- 
iora  in  cupro  sive  argento,  et  circumflecte  cum  subula 
in  tribus  auriculis,  aut  quatuor,  vel  quinque,  sive  sex,  secun- 
dum grossitudinem  quam  volueris,  ad  mensuram  uniuscujusque 
turibuli  minoris  sive  majoris.  Et  cum  omnes  catenas  unius 
turibuli  in  unam  partem  plexueris,  tolle  lignum  tenue  ex 
quercu  sive  fago,  et  fac  in  eo  multa  foramina  cum  gracili  ferro 
rotando  et  calido,  per  quae  foramina  catenam  igne  recoctam 
et  refrigeratam  transduces  et  denuo  recoques,  rursumque  per 
aliud  foramen  transduces  et  recoques,  sicque  facies,  donee  per 
omnia  sequaliter  sit  grossam  et  rotundam.    Deinde  incide  ip- 

'  vitios^  "  cliatenis  "  in  MS.  Harlei. 


TRANSLATION. 


303 


cinders,  carefully  pour  in.  The  two  moulds  being  in  this 
manner  founded,  allow  them  to  remain  until  the  funnel  above 
grow  black  ;  then,  the  earth  being  removed,  taking  them  from 
the  trough,  place  them  in  a  safe  place  until  they  grow  quite 
cold,  above  all  things  taking  care  that  you  cast  no  water  over 
the  hot  moulds,  because  the  nuclei  which  are  inside  are  in- 
stantly swelled  if  they  feel  humidity,  and  all  the  work  is  burst 
asunder.  When  they  have  cooled  by  themselves  you  remove 
the  clay,  and  carefully  examine  them ;  and  if  anything  be  de- 
ficient through  negligence  or  casualty,  filing  about  that  place 
you  will  thin  it,  and  w^ax  being  appHed  and  the  clay  added, 
when  dry  you  warm  it,  and  thus  found  over  it,  until  that 
which  you  pour  over  adhere,  the  jet  flowing  over  the  place. 
When  you  have  examined  this,  should  it  be  insecure,  you  will 
solder  it  with  the  burnt  wine  stone  and  the  filing  from  the 
mixture  of  silver  and  copper,  as  we  have  before  prescribed. 
After  this,  with  difterent  files,  square,  triangular,  and  round, 
you  will  first  file  across  all  the  surfaces.  You  then  sculp 
them  with  the  sculping  instruments,  and  scrape  them  with 
the  scrapers;  at  last,  the  work  being  cleansed  everywhere 
with  sand  with  wood  slightly  crushed  at  the  end,  you  will 
gild  it. 


CHAPTER  LXII. 

OF  THE  CHAINS. 

In  making  the  chains,  first  first  draw  out  very  fine,  or  thicker, 
wires  in  copper  or  silver,  and  bend  them  with  the  bodkin  into 
three,  or  four,  or  five,  or  six  ears,  according  to  the  breadth  you 
may  wish,  to  the  proportion  of  each  large  or  small  censer. 
And  when  you  have  bent  all  the  chains  of  one  censer  in  one 
piece  take  a  thin  wood  of  oak  or  beech,  and  make  numerous 
holes  in  it  with  a  pointed  iron  instrument,  round  and  hot; 
through  these  holes  you  draw  the  chain,  cooked  in  the  fire 
and  again  cooled,  and  you  again  cook  it ;  again  you  draw  it 
through  another  hole  and  re-cook  it,  and  you  act  thus  until  it 
is  equally  thick  and  round.    Then  cut  this  chain  into  pieces. 


304 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


sam  catenam  per  partes  ad  quantitatem  turibuli,  mediam  autem 
partem  breviorem,  et  longiores  reliquas;  aptatis  foraminibus 
in  utrisque  summitatibus  catenarum,  obfirmabis  eas,  quae 
longiores  sunt,  in  inferiore  parte  turibuli  clavis  firmis  et  trans- 
ductis ;  compositse  per  superiorem  partem  impones  anulos 
parvulos,  cum  quibus  aptabis  et  obfirmabis  eas  ad  lilium  in- 
ferius,  per  quod  manu  gestari  debet  cum  magno  anulo  eidem 
superius  imposito.  Mediam  vero  catenam,  quae  brevior  est, 
obfirmabis  clavo  in  superior!  parte  turibuli  in  uno  capite,  et 
alterum  imposito  anulo  aptabis  inferius  sub  lilio ; .  et  sic  pro- 
curabis  ut  turibulum  ex  omni  parte  sequaliter  pendeat. 

Possunt  etiam  eodem  modo  et  ordine,  quo  prsediximus, 
turibula  diversae  formae  et  diversi  operis  percuti  et  fundi  in 
auro  et  argento  atque  auricalco.  Sed  magnopere  cavendum 
est,  ut  auricalcum,  quod  deaurari  debet,  omnino  purum  sit  et 
purgatum  a  plumbo,  propter  diversa  infortunia,  quae  deauran- 
tibus  evenire  solent.  Quod  auricalcum  si  vis  componere, 
primo  naturam  cupri,  ex  quo  efRcitur,  disce. 


CAPUT  LXIII. 

DE  CUPRO. 

CUPRUM  in  terra  nascitur.  Cujus  vena  cum  invenitur, 
summo  labore  fodiendo  et  frangendo  acquiritur.  Est 
enim  lapis  colore  viridis  ac  durissimus  et  plumbo  naturaliter 
mixtus.  Qui  lapis  abundanter  effossus  rogo  inponitur  et  com- 
buritur  in  modum  calcis,  nec  tarn  en  mutat  colorem,  sed  du- 
ritiam  amittit  ut  confrangi  possit.  Deinde  minutatim  con- 
fractus  fornaci  imponitur,  follibus  atque  carbonibus  adhibitis, 
incessanter  die  ac  nocte  conflatur.  Quod  ipsum  diligenter  et 
caute  fieri  debet;  id  est,  ut  primo  carbones  inponantur*,  et 

'  "  Deinde  lapidis  minutiae  superfundantur,  rursumque  carbones."  Ex  Cod.  Ouelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


305 


according  to  the  size  of  the  censer,  the  middle  piece,  how- 
ever, shorter,  the  rest  longer;  openings  being  adapted  at 
both  ends  of  the  chains,  you  will  fasten  the  longest  of  them 
to  the  lower  part  of  the  censer  with  solid  nails  passed  through 
them  ;  joined  together  at  the  upper  part,  you  place  small  rings 
upon  them,  with  which  you  will  adjust  them  and  fasten  them 
upon  the  lily  at  bottom,  by  which  it  should  be  carried  in  the 
hand  with  a  large  ring  placed  upon  its  summit.  But  the  middle 
chain,  which  is  shorter,  you  will  fasten  by  a  nail  to  the  upper 
part  of  the  censer  at  one  end,  and  you  will  adjust  the  other 
under  the  lily  by  a  ring  placed  below ;  and  you  will  thus 
take  care  that  the  censer  may  hang  equally  on  every  side. 

Censers  of  various  forms  and  various  workmanship  can  be 
beaten  and  founded  in,  gold  and  silver  and  brass,  in  the  same 
manner  and  fashion  as  we  have  related.  But  it  is  greatly 
to  be  heeded  that  the  brass,  which  should  be  gilt,  be  quite 
pure  and  purged  from  lead,  on  account  of  divers  mishaps 
which  are  wont  to  happen  to  the  gilders.  If  you  wish  to 
compose  this  brass,  first  learn  the  nature  of  copper,  from 
which  it  is  made. 


CHAPTER  LXIII. 

OF  COPPER. 

Copper  is  engendered  in  the  earth.  When  a  vein  of  which 
is  found,  it  is  acquired  with  the  greatest  labour  by  digging 
and  breaking.  It  is  a  stone  of  a  green  colour,  and  most  hard 
and  naturally  mixed  with  lead.  This  stone,  dug  up  in  abund- 
ance, is  placed  upon  a  pile  and  burned,  after  the  manner  of 
chalk,  nor  does  it  change  colour,  but  yet  loses  its  hardness,  so 
that  it  can  be  broken  up.  Then,  being  bruised  small,  it  is  placed 
in  the  furnace ;  coals  and  the  bellows  being  applied,  it  is  in- 
cessantly forged  by  day  and  night.  This  should  be  done 
carefully  and  with  caution ;  that  is,  at  first  coals  are  placed 
in,  Q  then  small  pieces  of  stone  are  distributed  over  them,  and 

'  From  the  Wolfenhutlel  MS. 

X 


306 


TIIEOPHILI  LTBER  III. 


denuo  lapis  ;  sicqiie  fiat  donee  ad  capacitatem  sufFieiat  for- 
nacis.  Cumque  lapis  eoeperit  liquefieri,  per  caverniilas  quas- 
dam  plumbum  effluit  et  cuprum  intro  remanet.  Quod  cum 
diutissime  conflatum  fuerit,  refrigeratum  et  eicitur,  et  rursum 
aliud  eodem  ordine  imponitur.  Huic  cupro  taliter  fuso  ad- 
miscetur  quinta  pars  stagni,  et  conficitur  metallum,  quo  cam- 
panse  funduntur. 

Invenitur  etiam  genus  lapidis  subcrocei  coloris,  et  inter- 
dum  rufus,  qui  calamina  dicitur,  qui  non  confractus  miscetur 
carbonibus  omnino  comminutis,  et  supradicto  cupro  in  for- 
nace  commiscetur,  quod  hoc  modo  componitur. 


CAPUT  LXIV. 

DE  FORNACE. 

STANT  quatuor  lapides  in  modum  crucis,  a  se  longitudine 
unius  pedis  separati,  partim  in  terra  firmati,  sed  alti- 
tudine  pedis  unius  super  terram  aequaliter  prominentes,  et 
omnes  in  superiori  parte  sequales.  Super  hos  lapides  ponun- 
tur  quatuor  ferri  quadranguli  grossitudine  unius  digiti,  et  lon- 
gitudine ut  possint  ab  uno  lapide  ad  alterum  protendi.  Inter 
hos  medii  ponuntur  alii  ferri  ejusdem  mensurse,  sequali  spatio, 
id  est  latitudine  trium  digitorum  a  se  separati :  super  quos 
etiam  in  transverso  ponuntur  alii  forma  et  mensura  inferiorum 
aequali,  ita  ut  foramina  videantur  esse  quadrangula.  His  ita 
distinctis,  super  ipsos  ferros  ponatur  argilla  fortiter  macerata 
et  fimo  equi  commixta,  spissitudine  trium  digitorum,  ita  ut 
ipsis  ferris  atque  lapidibus  ex  omni  parte  adhsereat,  et  ita  sit, 
quasi  lares  rotunda  super  lapides  jaceat.    Deinde  cum  rotundo 

'  "  Sed  ita  ut  effoditur,  lignis  congestis  et  abundanter  siiccensis  imponitur,  et  donee 
omnino  candeat  comburitur.  Qui  lapis  post  haec  refrigeratus  et  minutissime  con- 
fractus."   Ex  Cod.  Quelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


307 


again  coals,)  and  the  stone  anew;  and  it  is  thus  arranged 
until  it  is  sufficient  for  the  size  of  the  furnace.  And  when  the 
stone  has  commenced  to  liquefy,  the  lead  flows  out  through 
some  small  cavities,  and  the  copper  remains  within.  When 
this  has  been  blown  upon  for  a  very  long  time,  and  cooled,  it 
is  taken  out  and  other  is  again  placed  in  after  the  same  order. 
To  this  copper  thus  melted  a  fifth  part  of  tin  is  added,  and  a 
metal  is  made  with  which  bells  are  founded. 

A  kind  of  stone  is  also  found  of  a  yellowish  colour,  and 
sometimes  red,  which  is  called  calamine,  which  is  not  broken 
up,  ( ^  but  as  it  is  dug  up  it  is  placed  upon  wood,  heaped  up 
and  very  glowing,  and  is  burned  until  it  quite  glows.  This 
stone,  afterwards  cooled  and  broken  very  small,)  is  mixed  with 
coals  finely  divided,  and  is  mingled  with  the  above-mentioned 
copper  in  the  furnace,  which  is  composed  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  LXIV. 

OF  THE  FURNACE. 

Four  stones,  in  the  fashion  of  a  cross,  stand,  separated 
from  each  other  the  length  of  a  foot,  partly  fixed  in  the 
earth,  but  rising  equally  to  the  height  of  a  foot  above  the 
ground,  and  all  equal  at  the  upper  part.  Upon  these  stones 
four  square  irons  are  placed,  of  the  thickness  of  a  finger,  and 
of  a  length  that  they  can  be  laid  across  from  one  stone  to 
another.  Between  these,  other  intervening  irons  are  placed 
of  the  same  size,  at  an  equal  distance,  that  is,  separated  from 
each  other  by  a  breadth  of  four  fingers :  upon  these  also 
others,  equal  in  form  and  measure  to  those  below,  are  placed 
across,  so  that  the  openings  may  appear  to  be  square.  These 
being  thus  separated,  clay,  strongly  beaten  and  mixed  with 
horse  dung,  is  placed  upon  the  same  irons,  to  the  thickness 
of  three  fingers,  so  that  it  may  adhere  to  these  irons  and 
stones  everywhere,  and  appear  as  if  a  round  hearth  lay  upon 
the  stones.    Then  with  a  round  wood  openings  are  made  iu 

'  From  the  WolfenhuUel  MS. 

X  2 


308 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


ligno  in  spatiis  inter  ferros  foramina  fiant  per  omnia  quanto 
possint  ampliora ;  et  sic  diligenter  siccetur. 

Deinde  ab  ipso^  sursum  fiat  murus  cum  minutis  lapidibus, 
et  eadem  argilla  in  modmn  ollae,  ita  ut  a  medietate  superius 
aliquantulum  strictior  sit,  et  fiat  altior  quam  latitudo  sit, 
atque  cum  ligaminibus  ferreis  quinque  aut  quatuor  circum- 
ligetur,  et  eadem  argilla  interius  et  exterius  diligenter  illini- 
atur.  Quo  facto  imponantur  carbones  ardentes  commixti  ex- 
tinctis,  et  mox  ventus  per  inferiora  foramina  ingrediens  ab- 
sque flatu  follis  educit  flammas,  et  quicquid  metalli  inponitur 
statim  per  se  liquescit.  Post  hsec  hoc  modo  componantur 
vascula  huic  operi  necessaria. 


CAPUT  LXV. 

DE  COMPOSITIONE  VASORUM. 

TOLLE  fragmina  veterum  vasorum,  in  quibus  ante  cu- 
prum sive  auricalcum  fusum  fuerat,  et  super  lapidem 
minutatim  confringe.  Deinde  accipe  terram,  ex  qua  fiunt 
ollae,  cujus  genera  sunt  duo ;  unum  album,  aliud  grisium ; 
ex  quibus  album  valet  ad  colorandum  aurum,  aliud  vero 
ad  hsec  vasa  componenda;  et  cum  minutissime  contriveris, 
banc  crudam  terram  in  mensura  commisces  alteri,  id  est 
combustse,  quam  primum  triveras,  hoc  modo.  Accipe  vas 
quodcunque  et  imple  illud  bis  ex  cruda  terra,  et  ter  ex  cocta, 
ita  ut  duse  partes  sint  crudse  et  tres  coctse,  et  ponens  simul 
in  vas  magnum  perfimde  aqua  tepida,  et  malleis  ac  manibus 
fortiter  macera,  donee  omnino  in  se  tenax  sit.  Deinde  hg- 
num  rotundum  incide  ad  mensuram,  quam  volueris  habere 
vasam,  secundum  quantitatem  fornacis,  et  super  illud  for- 
mabis  vasculum  unum,  et  formatum  mox  circumlinies  cineri- 
bus  siccis,  et  sic  juxta  ignem  pone  donee  siccetur.   Hoc  modo 

>  "  lare."    Ex.  Cod.  Guelph. 


TRANSLATION. 


309 


the  spaces  between  the  irons  everywhere,  as  many  as  possible ; 
and  so  it  is  carefully  dried. 

Then,  from  the  same  (hearth),  a  wall  may  be  made  with 
minute  stones  and  the  same  clay,  after  the  fashion  of  a  pot, 
so  that  from  the  middle  upwards  it  may  be  somewhat  nar- 
rower, and  may  be  higher  than  broad,  and  it  is  bound  round 
with  four  or  five  iron  bands,  and  the  same  clay  is  carefully 
plastered  inside  and  out.  Which  being  done,  glowing  coals, 
mixed  with  cinders,  are  placed  in,  and  soon  the  wind,  enter- 
ing through  the  holes  below,  nourishes  the  flames  without 
the  breath  of  the  bellows,  and  whatever  metal  is  placed  in 
immediately  liquefies  by  itself.  Afterwards  the  small  cups 
necessary  for  this  work  are  made  in  this  manner. 


CHAPTER  LXV. 

OF  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  THE  VASES. 

Take  fragments  of  old  vases,  in  which  copper  or  brass  has  been 
before  fused,  and  break  them  small  upon  a  stone.  Then  take 
the  earth  of  which  pots  are  made,  of  which  kinds  there  are 
two,  one  white,  another  grey ;  of  these  the  white  is  useful  for 
colouring  gold,  but  the  other  for  composing  these  vases ;  and 
when  you  have  ground  it  together  very  finely,  you  mingle 
this  crude  earth  with  the  other,  in  proportion,  that  is,  to  the 
burnt  material  which  you  first  ground,  in  this  manner :  Take 
any  vase  and  fill  it  twice  with  this  crude  earth,  and  three 
times  with  the  burnt  (fragments),  so  that  two  parts  may 
be  crude  and  three  burnt,  and  placing  them  together  in  a 
large  vase,  pour  warm  water  over  them,  and  beat  strongly  with 
mallets  and  the  hands  until  it  has  become  quite  tenacious. 
Then  cut  wood  round,  to  the  size  which  you  wish  the  vase  to 
possess,  according  to  the  capacity  of  the  furnace,  and  upon  it 
you  will  form  a  small  vase,  and  being  made,  you  directly 
cover  it  round  with  dry  ashes,  and  so  place  it  near  the  fire 
until  it  be  dry.    In  this  manner  make  as  many  vases  as  you 


310 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


311 


wish.  But  when  they  have  been  carefully  dried,  place  three, 
four,  or  five  in  the  furnace,  as  much  as  the  furnace  can  con- 
tain, and  heap  coals  over  them. 


CHAPTER  LXVI. 

OF  THE  COMPOSITION   OF  BRASS. 

When  they  are  glowing,  take  calamine,  of  which  I  have  be- 
fore spoken,  very  finely  ground,  with  coals,  and  arrange  them 
in  each  cup  about  one  sixth  part  full,  and  fill  it  quite  with  the 
above-mentioned  copper,  and  cover  with  coals.  From  time 
to  time  prick  the  openings  below  with  a  slender  and  curved 
piece  of  wood,  that  they  may  not  by  chance  be  obstructed, 
so  that  the  ashes  may  fall  out,  and  the  wind  may  have  more 
access.  And  when  the  copper  is  altogether  melted,  take  a 
slender  iron,  long  and  curved  and  fixed  to  a  wooden  handle, 
and  carefully  stir  it,  that  the  calamine  may  be  mixed  with 
the  copper.  But  after  this,  with  the  long  forceps  shghtly 
raise  the  vases  separately,  and  remove  them  a  little  from 
their  places,  that  they  may  not  by  chance  adhere  to  the 
hearth ;  and  again,  as  before,  place  calamine  in  all  of  them, 
and  refill  them  with  copper,  and  cover  them  with  coals. 
When  they  have  anew  become  quite  fluid,  again  carefully  stir 
them,  and  taking  out  one  vase  with  the  forceps,  pour  out  the 
whole  into  the  trench  dug  in  the  earth,  and  return  the  vase 
to  its  place.  Taking  calamine,  directly  replace  it  as  before, 
and  place  upon  it  as  much  of  the  copper  which  you  poured 
out  as  the  vessel  can  contain.  And  being  liquefied  as  be- 
fore, stir  it  and  re-add  calamine,  and  fill  it  up  with  the  copper 
(you)  poured  out,  and  leave  it  to  be  melted.  Do  this  to  each 
of  the  vases ;  and  when  in  all  it  has  become  melted,  and  has 
been  stirred  for  a  long  time,  pour  out  as  before  and  keep  it 
until  you  have  need.  This  mixture  is  called  brass,  from 
which  caldrons  are  cast,  but  it  cannot  be  gilt  when  the 
copper  has  not  been  entirely  purged  from  lead  before  mixture. 
Then  in  making  brass  which  can  be  gilt,  begin  thus. 


312 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  LXVIL 

DE  PURIFICATIONE  CUPRI. 

TOLLE  patellam  ferream  cujus  magnitudinis  volueris,  et 
lini  earn  interius  et  exterius  argilla  fortiter  macerata  et 
mixta,  et  diligenter  exsiccata.  Deinde  pone  earn  ante  for- 
nacem  ferrarii  super  carbones,  ita  ut  cum  folles  flaverint, 
ventus  partim  interius  partim  superius  procedat  et  non  in- 
ferius.  Et  circumpositis  minutis  carbonibus,  sequaliter  in- 
pone  cuprum,  et  superadde  congeriem  carbonum.  Quod  cum 
diu  sufflando  fuerit  liquefactum,  discooperi  et  mox  minutam 
carbonum  favillam  super  illud  proice,  et  cum  ligno  gracili  et 
sicco  quasi  miscendo  commove,  videbisque  statim  plumbum 
combustum  ipsi  favillse  quasi  gluten  adhserere.  Quo  ejecto 
iterum  carbones  superpone,  ut  primo  diu  sufflans,  rursumque 
discooperi,  et  tunc  fac  ut  ante  fecisti.  Quod  tamdiu  facies 
donee  plumbum  omnino  excoquendo  eicias.  Deinde  infunde 
super  infusorium,  quod  ad  hoc  aptaveris,  et  sic  probabis  si 
purum  sit.  Tene  illud  cum  forcipe  ita  candens,  prius  quam 
refrigeretur  et  percute  grandi  malleo  super  incudem  fortiter, 
et  si  frangitur  aut  finditur,  denuo  oportebit  illud  liquefieri 
sicut  prius.  Si  vero  sanum  permanserit,  refrigerabis  in  aqua, 
et  aliud  eodem  modo  coques.  Hoc  cuprum  vocatur  torridum. 
Ex  hoc  cupro  quicquid  facere  volueris  ductih  opere,  in  imagi- 
nibus,  et  bestiis  et  avibus,  in  turibuHs  et  diversis  vasis,  in 
limbis  tabularum,  in  fills  et  catenis,  ad  deaurandum  operari 
poteris.  Ex  hoc  cupro  confice  auricalcum  cum  adjectione 
calaminae,  eodem  modo  quo  superius  ses  caldariorum  composu- 
isti.  Quod  cum  quater  aut  quinquies  recoxeris  in  vascuHs 
furno  impositis,  quicquid  exinde  in  diversorum  operum  varie- 
tate  fuderis,  optime  deaurare  poteris. 


TRANSLATION. 


313 


CHAPTER  LXVIL 

OF  THE  PURIFICATION  OF  COPPER. 

Take  an  iron  dish  of  the  size  you  wish,  and  Hne  it  in- 
side and  out  with  clay  strongly  beaten  and  mixed,  and  it  is 
carefully  dried.    Then  place  it  before  a  forge  upon  the  coals, 
so  that  when  the  bellows  act  upon  it  the  wind  may  issue 
partly  within  and  partly  above  it,  and  not  below  it.  And 
very  small  coals  being  placed  round  it,  place  the  copper  in  it 
equally,  and  add  over  it  a  heap  of  coals.    When,  by  blowing 
a  long  time,  this  has  become  melted,  uncover  it  and  cast  im- 
mediately fine  ashes  of  coals  over  it,  and  stir  it  with  a  thin 
and  dry  piece  of  wood  as  if  mixing  it,  and  you  will  directly 
see  the  burnt  lead  adhere  to  these  ashes  like  a  glue.  Which 
being  cast  out  again  superpose  coals,  and  blowing  for  a  long 
time,  as  at  first,  again  uncover  it,  and  then  do  as  you  did  be- 
fore.   You  do  this  until  at  length  by  cooking  it  you  can 
withdraw  the  lead  entirely.    Then  pour  it  over  the  mould 
which  you  have  prepared  for  this,  and  you  will  thus  prove  if  it 
be  pure.   Hold  it  with  the  pincers,  glowing  as  it  is,  before  it  has 
become  cold,  and  strike  it  with  a  large  hammer  strongly  over 
the  anvil,  and  if  it  be  broken  or  split,  you  must  hquefy  it 
anew  as  before.    If,  however,  it  should  remain  sound,  you 
will  cool  it  in  water^  and  you  cook  other  (copper)  in  the  same 
manner.    This  copper  is  called  burnt.    From  this  copper 
you  can  work  whatever  you  may  wish  to  make,  for  gilding,  in 
ductile  work,  in  figures  and  animals  and  birds,  in  censers  and 
different  vases,  in  borders  of  tablets,  in  wires  and  chains. 
Make  auricalcum  from  this  copper  with  the  addition  of  cala- 
mine, in  the  same  manner  as  you  have  composed  the  brass  of 
caldrons  above.    When  you  have  recooked  this  four  or  five 
times  in  small  vessels  placed  in  the  furnace,  whatever  you 
have  cast  from  it  in  a  variety  of  divers  work,  you  can  gild 
in  the  best  manner. 


314 


THEOPHILl   LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  LXVIIL 

QUALITER   DEAURETUR  AURICALCUM. 

DEAURARE  vis  igitur  thuribiilum  ex  auricalco,  fac 
eodem  modo  sicut  superius  deaurasti  auriculas  argen- 
tei  calicis,  sed  cum  majori  cautela,  quia  argentum  et  simplex 
cuprum  facilius  deaurari  possunt  quam  auricalcum.  Debet 
enim  morosius  et  diligentius  invivari  et  spissius  deaurari,  et 
frequentius  lavari,  et  diutius  siccari.  Quod  cum  coeperit  cro- 
ceum  colorem  trahere,  si  videris  albas  maculas  undique  ex 
inde  exire,  ut  nolint  sequaliter  siccari,  hsec  est  culpa  calaminae, 
quod  non  fuit^,  bene  purgatum  et  excoctum,  quod  sic  emen- 
dabis.  Tolle  smigma  et  pone  in  vasculum  mundum,  et  infunde 
ei  aquam,  et  digitis  tuis  quasi  lavando  commisce  diligentei-, 
donee  fiat  quasi  fex  cerevisiae,  atque  cum  setis  porci  linies 
illud  sequaliter  per  omnia  super  deauratum  turibulum.  Deinde 
pone  super  carbones,  et  tam  diu  calefac,  donee  confiectio  ilia 
incipiat  nigrescere,  et  sic  elevans  cum  forcipe  per  omnia  dili- 
genter  asperges  aqua,  sicque  lavabis,  et  cum  filis  ex  auricalco, 
ut  supra  dictum  est,  polies.  Quo  facto  rursum  circumfri- 
cabis  cum  confectione  vinicei  lapidis,  et  vivo  argento,  et  denuo 
deaurabis  propter  calorem  carbonum,  qui  saepius  in  illud  mit- 
tuntur,  ne  forte,  si  tenue  deauratum  fuerit,  ipsum  aurum 
comburatur,  sicque  iterum  polies  cum  filis,  ac  denuo  super 
carbones  pones  diutius  calefaciens,  donee  rubeum  colorem 
trahat,  et  mox  refrigerabis  in  aqua,  et  cum  ferris  sequalibus 
et  ad  hoc  aptis  polies,  sicque  cum  atramento  combusto  inco- 
lorabis,  ut  prsediximus. 

'  "  aequaliter  commixta,  sive  plumbi,  quod  cuprum  non  fuit "  Ex  Cod.  Gmlph. 


TRANSLATION. 


315 


CHAPTER  LXVIII. 

HOW  FINE  BRASS  CAN   BE  GILT. 

Do  you  therefore  wish  to  gild  a  censer,  of  fine  brass,  do 
in  the  same  manner  as  above,  when  you  gilded  the  handles 
of  the  silver  chahce,  but  with  greater  care,  because  silver 
and  simple  copper  can  be  more  easily  gilt  than  auricalcum. 
It  should  also  be  more  warily  and  carefully  revived,  and  more 
thickly  gilt,  also  more  frequently  washed  and  longer  dried. 
When  it  has  begun  to  show  a  yellow  colour,  if  you  see  white 
spots  spread  all  over  it,  which  will  not  become  equally  dry, 
this  is  the  effect  of  the  calamine,  which  was  not  well  purged 
and  cooked^,  which  you  will  thus  remedy.  Take  soap  and 
place  it  in  a  small  clean  cup  and  pour  water  upon  it,  and  with 
your  fingers,  as  if  in  washing,  mix  it  carefully  until  it  has 
become  like  the  lees  of  beer,  and  with  hog's  bristles  anoint  it 
smoothly  every  where  over  the  gilt  censer.  Then  place  it 
upon  the  coals  and  heat  it  until  this  mixture  begins  to  blacken, 
and  so  raising  it  with  the  pincers,  sprinkle  it  with  water  every 
where,  and  thus  you  will  wash  it,  and  you  polish  it  with  brass 
wires  as  before  mentioned.  Which  being  done,  you  will 
again  rub  it  around  with  the  wine-stone  and  quicksilver,  and 
will  gild  it  anew,  on  account  of  the  heat  of  the  coals  which 
are  more  often  placed  in  it,  unless  by  hazard,  if  it  were  thinly 
gilt,  the  gold  itself  may  be  burnt,  and  again  you  polish  it 
with  the  wires,  and  place  it  anew  upon  the  coals,  warming  it 
for  a  longer  time,  until  it  shows  a  red  colour,  and  you  will 
immediately  cool  it  in  water,  and  polish  it  with  smooth  instru- 
ments proper  for  this  work,  and  will  colour  it  with  atrament, 
burnt,  as  we  have  before  said. 

•  which  was  not  well  mixed,  or  of  lead  which  was  not  well  purged  and  cooked 
from  it.    From  the  Wolfenhuttel  MS. 


316 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


•   CAPUT  LXIX. 

QUALITER  SEPARETUR  AURUM  A  CUPRO. 

QUOD  si  aliquando  vasa  cuprea  seu  argentea  deaurata 
fregeris,  vel  aliud  quodlibet  opus,  hoc  modo  aurum 
separare  poteris.  Tolle  ossa  cujuscumque  animalis  volueris, 
quae  per  plateam  inveneris,  et  conbure,  quse  refrigerata  minu- 
tatim  tere,  et  tertiam  partem  ci'nerum  ex  fago  admisce,  et  fac 
testas  sicut  in  purificando  argento  ut  superius  diximus ;  quas 
igne  sive  sole  siccabis.  Deinde  aurum  a  cupro  diligenter 
abrades,  et  ipsam  rasuram  complicabis  in  plumbo  tenue  per- 
cusso,  atque  una  ex  testis  illis  coram  fornace  prunis  imposita, 
jam  que  calefactae  ipsam  complicaturam  plumbi  cum  rasura 
impones,  et  superjectis  carbonibus  conflabis.  Cumque  lique- 
factum  fuerit,  eo  modo  quo  solet  argentum  purificari,  interdum 
prunas  amovendo  et  plumbum  addendo,  interdum  recoquendo 
et  morose  flando  combures,  donee  cupro  penitus  absumpto, 
purum  aurum  appareat. 


CAPUT  LXX. 

QUOMODO  SEPARETUR  AURUM  AB  ARGENTO. 

CUM  raseris  aurum  de  argento,  imponas  ipsam  rasuram  in 
vasculum,  in  quo  solet  aurum  vel  argentum  liquefieri,  et 
super  inprime  panniculum  lineum,  ne  forte  quid  inde  eiciatur 
a  vento  follis,  atque  coram  fornace  ponens  liquefac ;  et  mox 
fragmina  sulphuris  inpone,  secundum  quantitatem  ipsius 
rasurse,  et  cum  carbone  gracili  diligenter  commove,  donee 
fumus  ejus  cesset ;  statim  efFunde  in  ferrum  infusorium. 
Deinde  super  incudem  leniter  percute,  ne  forte  quid  inde 
resiliat  illi  nigri,  quod  sulphur  combussit,  quia  ipsum  argentum 


TRANSLATION. 


317 


CHAPTER  LXIX. 

HOW  GOLD  IS  SEPARATED  FROM  COPPER. 

But  if  at  any  time  you  have  broken  copper  or  silver  gilt  ves- 
sels, or  any  other  work,  you  can  in  this  manner  separate  the 
gold.  Take  the  bones  of  whatever  animal  you  please,  which 
(bones)  you  may  have  found  in  the  street,  and  burn  them, 
being  cold,  grind  them  finely,  and  mix  with  them  a  third  part 
of  beech-wood  ashes,  and  make  cups  as  we  have  mentioned 
above  in  the  purification  of  silver ;  you  will  dry  these  at  the 
fire  or  in  the  sun.  Then  you  careftdly  scrape  the  gold  from 
the  copper,  and  you  will  fold  this  scraping  in  lead  beaten 
thin,  and  one  of  these  cups  being  placed  in  the  embers  before 
the  furnace,  and  now  become  warm,  you  place  in  this  fold  of 
lead  with  the  scraping,  and  coals  being  heaped  upon  it  you 
will  blow  it.  And  when  it  has  become  melted,  in  the  same 
manner  as  silver  is  accustomed  to  be  purified,  sometimes  by 
removing  the  embers  and  by  adding  lead,  sometimes  by  re- 
cooking  and  warily  blowing,  you  burn  it,  until,  the  copper 
being  entirely  absorbed,  the  gold  may  appear  pure. 


CHAPTER  LXX. 

HOW  GOLD  IS  SEPARATED  FROM  SILVER. 

When  you  have  scraped  the  gold  from  silver,  place  this 
scraping  in  a  small  cup  in  which  gold  or  silver  is  accustomed 
to  be  melted,  and  press  a  small  linen  cloth  upon  it,  that  no- 
thing may  by  chance  be  abstracted  from  it  by  the  wind  of  the 
bellows,  and  placing  it  before  the  furnace,  melt  it ;  and 
directly  lay  fragments  of  sulphur  in  it,  according  to  the  quan- 
tity of  the  scraping,  and  carefully  stir  it  with  a  thin  piece  of 
charcoal  until  its  fumes  cease ;  and  immediately  pour  it  into 
an  iron  mould.  Then  gently  beat  it  upon  the  anvil,  lest  by 
chance  some  of  that  black  may  fly  from  it  which  the  sulphur 


318 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


est.  Non  enim  sulphur  auri  quicquam  consumit,  sed  solum 
argentuni,  quod  taliter  ab  auro  separate  quodque  diligenter 
servabis.  Rursum  in  eodem  vasculo  sicut  prius  liquefac 
ipsum  aurum  et  adice  sulphur.  Quo  commoto  atque  elFuso, 
quod  nigrum  fuerit  frange  et  serva,  sicque  fades  donee  aurum 
purum  appareat.  Deinde  omne  illud  nigrum,  quod  servasti 
diligenter,  compone  super  testam  compositam  ex  osse  et 
cinere,  et  adice  plumbum,  sicque  combure,  ut  recipias  ar- 
gentum.  Quod  si  ad  usum  nigelli  servare  volueris,  prius 
quam  comburas,  adde  ei  cuprum  et  plumbum  secundum  men- 
suram  superius  memoratam,  et  confunde  cum  sulphure. 


CAPUT  LXXI. 

QUOMODO   DENIGRETUR  CUPRUM. 

DE  cupro  supradicto,  quod  rubeum  dicitur,  fac  tibi  laminas 
attenuare*,  quantaj  longitudinis  velis.  Quas  cum  inci- 
deris  et  aptaveris  operi  tuo,  pertrahe  in  iUis  flosculos,  sive 
bestias,  aut  aliud  quod  volueris,  et  fode  cum  gracili  ferro  fos- 
sorio.  Deinde  tolle  oleum,  quod  fit  de  semine  hni,  et  cum 
digito  superlinies  per  omnia  tenue,  atque  cum  penna  anseris 
agquabis,  et  tenens  cum  forcipe  pones  super  prunas  ardentes. 
Cumque  modicum  incaluerit,  et  oleum  liquefactum  fuerit,  de- 
nuo  cum  penna  sequabis  rursumque  impones  prunis,  sicque 
facies  donee  exsiccetur.  Quod  si  videris  per  omnia  sequahter 
esse,  mitte  super  carbones  valde  ignitos,  et  tarn  diu  jaceat, 
donee  cesset  fumare.  Et  si  satis  nigrum  fuerit,  bene;  sin 
autem,  valde  parum  olei  cum  penna  super  calidum  ita  linies, 
sequatumque  denuo  conflatis  carbonibus  superpone,  faciens 
sicut  prius.  Cumque  refrigeratum  fuerit,  non  in  aqua  sed 
per  se,  cum  ferris  rasoriis  valde  acutis  rade  diligenter  flos- 
culos, ita  ut  campi  appareant  nigri.    Si  vero  litterae  fuerint, 

'  attenuaril 


TRANSLATION. 


319 


has  burnt,  because  it  is  itself  silver.  For  the  sulphur  con- 
sumes nothing  of  the  gold,  but  the  silver  only,  which  it  thus 
separates  from  the  gold,  and  which  you  will  carefully  keep. 
Again  melt  this  gold  in  the  same  small  cup  as  before,  and  add 
sulphur.  This  being  stirred  and  poured  out,  break  what  has 
become  black  and  keep  it,  and  do  thus  until  the  gold  appear 
pure.  Then  gather  together  all  that  black,  which  you  have 
carefully  kept,  upon  the  cup  made  from  the  bone  and  ash, 
and  add  lead,  and  so  burn  it  that  you  may  recover  the  silver. 
But  if  you  wish  to  keep  it  for  the  service  of  niello,  before  you 
burn  it  add  to  it  copper  and  lead,  according  to  the  measure 
mentioned  above,  and  mix  it  with  sulphur. 


CHAPTER  LXXI. 

HOW  COPPER  IS  BLACKENED. 

Cause  leaves  of  the  above-mentioned  copper,  which  is  called 
red,  to  be  thinned  for  you,  of  the  length  you  wish.  When  you 
have  cut  and  adapted  these  to  your  work,  portray  upon  them 
small  flowers,  or  animals,  or  other  thing  which  you  wish,  and 
sculp  it  with  a  fine  sculping  iron.  Then  take  oil  which  is 
made  from  linseed,  and  anoint  it  all  over  thinly  with  the 
finger,  and  smooth  it  with  a  goose  feather,  and  holding  it 
with  the  forceps,  place  it  upon  the  glowing  embers ;  and 
when  it  is  a  httle  warmed  and  the  oil  has  become  hquid,  you 
will  smooth  it  anew  with  the  pen,  and  you  again  place  it  upon 
the  embers,  and  do  thus  until  it  is  dried.  But  if  you  see  that 
it  is  smooth  every  where,  place  it  over  some  very  hot  coals, 
and  let  it  he  until  it  be  dried.  And  if  it  be  black  enough,  it 
is  well ;  but  if  not,  you  anoint  a  very  little  oil  with  the  feather 
over  the  hot  copper,  and  being  made  smooth,  again  place  it 
upon  the  lighted  coals,  acting  as  before.  When  they  have  be- 
come cold,  not  in  water,  but  alone,  scrape  small  flowers  care- 
fully with  very  sharp  scraping  instruments,  so  that  the  grounds 
may  appear  black.    Should  they  be  letters,  however,  it  is  at 


320 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  TII. 


in  tuo  sit  arbitrio,  utmm  eas  nigras  volueris  esse  an  deauratas. 
Cum  vero  lamina  diligenter  rasa  fuerit,  statim  invivabis  earn 
cum  confectione  vinicei  lapidis  et  vivo  argento,  et  mox  deau- 
rabis,  deauratamque  non  exstingues  in  aqua,  sed  per  se  refrige- 
rabitur,  poliesque  sicut  supra  dictum  est,  et  eodem  modo 
colorabis. 


CAPUT  LXXII. 

DE  OPERE  INTERRASILI. 

ATTENUA  tibi  laminas  ex  eodem  cupro  sicut  superius, 
sed  spissius,  quas  pertractas  quocumque  opere  volueris 
fodies,  ut  suprerius.  Deinde  habeas  ferros  graciles  et  lati- 
ores,  secundum  quantitatem  camporum,  qui  sint  in  una  sum- 
mitate  tenues  et  acuti,  in  altera  obtusi,  qui  vocantur  meizil  ^ ; 
ponensque  laminam  super  incudem,  campos  omnes  perforabis, 
cum  supradictis  ferris  percutiens  cum  malleo.  Cumque 
omnes  campi  tali  modo  fuerint  perforati,  cum  limis  parvulis 
sequabis  eos  per  omnia  usque  ad  tractos.  Quo  facto  deau- 
rabis,  et  polies  laminam,  ut  supra. 

Eodem  modo  fiunt  tabulae,  et  laminae  argenteae  super  libros 
cum  imaginibus,  floribus  atque  bestiolis  et  avibus,  ex  quibus 
pars  deauratur,  videlicet  coronse  imaginum  et  capilli  atque 
vestimenta  per  loca,  et  pars  remanet  argentea.  Fiunt  etiam 
et  laminae  cupreae  et  fodiuntur,  et  denigrantur  ac  raduntur  ; 
deinde  in  patella  liquefacto  stagno  mittuntur,  ut  rasurae  albae 
fiant,  quasi  deargentatae  sint.  Ex  his  ligantur  cathedrae  pictae, 
et  sediha,  atque  lecti ;  ornantur  etiam  libri  pauperum. 

*  Codex  Guelpherh.  "  meizel "  hahet. 


TRANSLATION. 


321 


your  option  whether  you  choose  them  to  be  black  or  gilt. 
When  a  plate  has  been  carefully  scraped,  you  will  imme- 
diately revive  it  with  the  mixture  of  wine-stone  and  quick- 
silver, and  will  directly  gild  it,  and  you  do  not  quench 
the  gilding  in  water,  but  it  will  become  cool  by  itself,  you 
polish  it  as  above  mentioned,  and  will  colour  it  in  the  same 
manner. 


CHAPTER  LXXII. 

OF  PIERCED  WORK. 

Thin  out  plates  from  the  same  copper  as  above,  but  thicker; 
these  being  designed,  sculp  whatever  work  you  may  wish, 
as  above.  You  then  have  thin  and  wide  instruments,  ac- 
cording to  the  size  of  the  grounds,  which  must  be  at  one  ex- 
tremity thin  and  sharp,  at  the  other  blunt,  which  are  called 
meizil;  and  placing  the  plate  upon  the  anvil,  you  will  per- 
forate all  the  grounds  with  the  above  mentioned  instruments, 
striking  with  the  hammer.  And  when  all  the  grounds  have 
been  perforated  in  such  manner,  you  will  smooth  them  all 
over  with  very  small  files  down  to  the  designs.  Which  being 
done  you  will  gild  it,  and  you  polish  the  plate  as  above. 
Tablets  are  made  in  the  same  manner,  and  silver  plates  upon 
books,  with  figures,  flowers,  animals  and  birds,  of  which  a  part 
is  gilt,  namely  the  crowns  of  figures,  and  hair,  and  garments, 
in  places,  and  part  remains  silver.  Copper  plates  are  also 
made,  and  they  are  carved  and  blackened  and  scraped ;  they 
are  then  placed  in  a  vessel  with  melted  tin,  that  the  scrapings 
may  become  white,  as  if  they  were  silvered.  With  these, 
painted  chairs  and  seats,  and  beds  are  bound ;  the  books  of 
the  poor  are  also  (thus)  ornamented. 


Y 


322 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


323 


CHAPTER  LXXIII. 

OF  PUNCHED  WORK. 

Plates  are  also  made  from  copper  in  the  above  manner,  and 
are  carved  with  delicate  work  of  figures,  flowers,  or  animals, 
and  the  work  is  so  disposed  that  the  grounds  may  be  small, 
they  are  then  cleaned  with  fine  sand  and  are  polished  and 
coloured  with  instruments  proper  for  this  work.  They  are 
afterwards  punched  with  the  punching  instrument,  which 
is  formed  in  this  manner.  An  instrument  is  made  from  steel, 
long  as  the  measure  of  a  finger,  fine  at  one  extremity,  at  the 
other,  thicker.  When  this  has  been  smoothly  filed  at  the 
finer  end,  a  small  hole  is  struck  in  the  middle  of  it  with  a 
very  fine  instrument  and  small  hammer;  this  hole  is  then 
carefully  filed  round  until  its  rim  become  equally  sharp 
around,  so  that  a  very  small  circle  may  appear  wherever  it 
may  be  struck.  This  instrument  shghtly  warmed  afterwards, 
so  that  it  scarcely  glows,  is  tempered  in  water.  Then  hold 
this  iron  in  the  left  hand  and  the  small  hammer  in  the  right, 
and  let  the  boy  sit  before  you,  who  can  hold  the  plate  upon 
the  anvil  and  adjust  it  in  the  places  in  which  you  are  about 
to  strike,  and  thus  fill  up  a  ground  with  very  fine  circles  as 
closely  as  you  can  join  one  to  another,  gently  striking  upon 
the  iron  with  the  small  hammer.  All  the  grounds  being 
filled  in,  in  this  manner,  place  the  plate  itself  upon  the  hot 
embers,  until  these  beatings  take  a  yellow  colour. 


CHAPTER  LXXIV. 

OF  BEATEN  WORK. 

Beat  a  gold  or  silver  plate  as  long  and  wide  as  you  wish  for 
relieving  the  figures.  Which  gold  or  silver,  when  you  have 
first  melted  it,  carefully  examine  by  scraping  or  carving  around 
it  lest  perchance  any  bubble  or  fissure  may  exist  in  it,  which 


324 


THEOPHILT   LIBER  III. 


sura  in  eo  sit,  quae  ssepe  coiitiiigiuit  ex  incuria,  sive  negli- 
gentia  vel  ignorantia  aut  inscitia  fundeiitis,  cum  aut  nimis  cali- 
dum,  aut  nimis  frigidum,  aut  nimis  festinato,  aut  nimis  pro- 
ductim  effunditar.  Cumque  considerate  et  caute  fuderis,  si 
hujusmodi  vitium  in  eo  deprehenderis,  cum  ferro  ad  hoc  apto 
diligenter  efFodies,  si  possis.  Quod  si  tantae  profunditatis 
vesica  sive  fissura  fuerit,  ut  efFodere  non  possis,  rursumque 
oportebit  te  fundere,  et  tamdiu  donee  sanum  sit.  Quod  cum 
fuerit,  provide,  ut  incudes  et  mallei  tui  omnino  sequales  et 
politi  sint,  cum  quibus  operari  debes,  et  omni  diligentia  pro- 
cura,  ut  tabula  aurea  vel  argentea  ita  sequaliter  ex  omni  parte 
attenuetur,  ut  in  nuUo  loco  spissius  sit  quam  in  alio.  Cum- 
que sic  attenuata  fuerit  ut  unguis  vix  inpressus  appareat  ex 
altera  parte,  et  omnino  sanissima,  statim  pertrahe  imagines 
quod  volueris,  secundum  libitos  tuos.  Pertrahes  autem  in  ea 
parte,  quse  sanior  et  decorior  videtur,  leniter  tamen  et  sic  ut 
ex  altera  parte  modice  a])pareat.  Deinde  cum  ferro  curvo 
bene  polito  fricabis  leniter  caput  imprimis,  quod  altius  debet 
esse ;  sicque  convertens  tabulam  in  recta  parte  fricabis  circa 
caput  et  cum  ferro  sequali  et  polito,  ita  ut  campus  descendat 
et  caput  elevetur,  et  statim  circa  caput  cum  malleo  mediocri 
super  incudem  percuties  leniter,  sicque  coram  fornace  super- 
positis  carbonibus  in  ipso  loco  recoques,  donee  candescat. 
Quo  facto  et  tabula  per  se  refrigerata,  iterum  in  inferiore 
parte  cum  curvo  ferro  fricabis  leniter  et  diligenter  fossam 
capitis  interius,  convertensque  tabulam  in  superiori  parte 
denuo  cum  sequali  ferro  fricabis,  et  depones  campum  ut  mon- 
ticulus  elevetur  capitis,  rursumque  cum  malleo  mediocri  circa 
ipsura  leniter  percutiens,  appositis  carbonibus  recoques ;  sic- 
que ssepe  facies,  diligenter  elevando  interius  et  exterius,  et 
crebro  percutiendo,  totiensque  recoquendo  donee  monticulus 
ille  ducatur  ad  altitudinem  trium  digitorum  aut  quatuor,  sive 
plus  vel  minus  secundum  quantitatem  imaginum.  Si  autem 
ipsum  aurum  vel  argentum  adhuc  aliquantum  spissius  est, 


TRANSLATION. 


325 


things  often  happen  through  carelessness  or  negligence,  or  ig- 
norance or  unskilfulness  of  the  founder,  when  it  is  cast  either 
too  hot  or  too  cold,  or  in  too  great  haste,  or  too  slowly.  When 
you  have  considerately  and  cautiously  cast  it,  should  you 
perceive  a  fault  of  this  kind  in  it,  carefully  sculp  it  out  with 
the  instrument  fit  for  this  work,  if  you  can.  But  should  the 
bubble  or  fissure  be  of  such  depth  that  you  cannot  dig  it  out, 
you  must  again  melt  it,  and  so  until  it  is  become  sound.  When 
it  has  become  so,  see  beforehand  that  the  anvils  and  your 
hammers,  with  which  you  should  work,  are  quite  smooth  and 
polished ;  and  take  care  that  the  gold  or  silver  plate  be 
so  equally  thinned  everywhere,  that  it  be  in  no  place  thicker 
than  in  another.  And  when  it  has  been  thinned  so  that  the 
nail,  slightly  pressed  upon  it,  may  show  upon  the  other  side, 
and  it  is  perfectly  sound,  directly  portray  the  figures  you  may 
wish,  according  to  your  will.  You  design,  also,  in  that  part 
which  is  seen  to  be  the  most  sound  and  beautiful,  gently  how- 
ever, and  so  that  it  may  slightly  appear  on  the  other  side. 
You  will  then  with  a  curved  iron,  well  polished,  gently  rub 
the  head,  in  the  first  place,  which  must  be  more  raised ;  and 
so  turning  the  plate  upon  the  right  side  you  will  rub  around 
the  head,  also  with  the  smooth  and  polished  iron,  so  that  the 
ground  may  descend  and  the  head  be  raised,  and  you  directly 
beat  around  the  head  with  a  middling  sized  hammer  upon  the 
anvil,  gently,  and  you  thus  cook  it  before  the  furnace,  until  it 
glows,  coals  being  superposed  in  that  place.  Which  being 
done,  and  the  plate  cooled  by  itself,  you  will  again  rub  it 
with  the  curved  instrument  on  the  underneath  part,  inside 
the  hollow  of  the  head,  slightly  and  carefully,  and  turning 
the  plate  you  will  again  rub  with  the  smooth  iron  upon  the 
upper  part,  and  you  depress  the  ground  that  the  relief  of  the 
head  may  be  raised,  and  again  gently  striking  it  with  the 
middling  hammer  about  this,  you  recook  it,  by  applying  the 
coals ;  and  thus  you  act  often,  by  carefully  raising  it  inside 
and  outside  and  frequently  hammering,  as  often  cooking 
until  the  relief  is  brought  to  the  height  of  three  or  four  fingers, 
or  more  or  less,  according  to  the  number  of  the  figures.  If, 
however,  the  gold  or  silver  is  yet  somewhat  too  thick,  you 


326 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


poteris  iiiterius  cum  longo  malleo  et  gracili  percutere  et  attenu- 
are,  si  opus  fuerit.  Quod  si  duo  capita,  vel  tria  seu  plura  in 
tabula  esse  debeant,  circa  unumquodque  ita  facere  debes  sicut 
dixi,  usque  ad  altitudinem  quantam  volueris.  Deinde  cum 
pertractorio  ferro  designa  corpus  vel  corpora  imaginum,  et  ita 
deducendo  et  interdum  percutiendo,  elevabis  ea  quantum  libu- 
erit;  hoc  tamen  procurans  ut  caput  semper  sit  altius.  Post 
hsec  designabis  nares  et  oculorum  supercilia,  os  et  aures,  capil- 
los,  oculos,  manus  et  brachia,  cseterasque  vestimentorum  um- 
bras, scabella  et  pedes,  et  sic  interius  cum  minoribus  curvis 
ferris  elevabis  leniter  et  diligenter,  summopere  cavens  ut  non 
rumpatur  aut  perforetur.  Quod  si  ex  ignorantia  seu  negli- 
gentia  contigerit,  hoc  modo  solidari  debet.  Tolle  ipsius  auri 
vel  argenti  modicum,  et  admisce  tertiam  partem  cupri,  fun- 
densque  pariter  limabis  subtiliter,  combustoque  viniceo  lapide, 
et  addito  sale  commiscebis  aqua,  ex  quo  tenuiter  liniens, 
fracturam  supersparge  limaturam.  Qua  siccata  denuo  confec- 
tionem  superlinies  spissius,  et  sic  inferius  et  superius  admotis 
carbonibus  leniter  flabis,  donee  videas  solidaturam  deffluere. 
Quod  videns  statim  asperge  leniter  aqua,  et  si  firmum  fuerit, 
bene;  sin  autem,  denuo  similiter  fac  usque  dum  firmum 
fuerit.  Si  autem  fractura  lata  fuerit,  diligenter  conjunge  ei 
particulam  ejusdem  auri  vel  argenti  sequaliter  tenuem,  quam 
simili  modo  solidabis,  donee  ex  omni  parte  adhsereat.  Cumque 
elevatura  imaginum  perducta  fuerit  usque  ad  subtiles  tractus, 
si  aurum  fuerit,  statim  facies  eos  et  polies  diligenter,  atque 
colorabis  cum  atramento  usque  ad  riiborem  combusto,  et  sale, 
ut  supra  in  opere  calicis.  Si  vero  argentea  fuerit  tabula,  et 
volueris  in  ipsis  imaginibus  deaurare  coronas,  capillos,  barbas, 
et  partes  vestimentorum,  hoc  oportet  fieri  prius — quam  sub- 
tiles  tractus  fiant,  hoc  modo.  Compone  duas  partes  argillae 
simplices,  subtiliter  tritae,  et  tertiam  salis,  et  in  vasculo  com- 
misce  cum  fece  cervisiae  mediocriter  spissse,  qua  confectione 


TRANSLATION. 


327 


can  beat  and  thin  it  with  a  long  and  slender  hammer,  if  need- 
ful. But  if  two  or  three,  or  more,  heads  should  be  in  the 
picture,  you  should  do  about  each  one  as  I  have  said,  until 
the  height  which  you  may  wish  is  attained.  Then  with 
the  tracing  instrument  design  the  body  or  bodies  of  the 
figures,  and  so,  by  depressing  and  sometimes  by  beating,  you 
will  relieve  them  as  much  as  it  may  please  you;  providing 
this,  however,  that  the  head  be  always  the  most  relieved. 
After  these  things  you  will  design  the  nostrils  and  eyebrows, 
the  mouth  and  ears,  the  hair,  eyes,  hands  and  arms,  and  the 
other  shadows  of  the  draperies,  the  footstools  and  feet,  and 
you  will  raise  them  inside  thus,  with  the  smallest  curved  in- 
struments, above  all  taking  care  that  it  be  not  broken  or  per- 
forated. But  if  through  want  of  knowledge,  or  negligence, 
this  should  happen,  it  should  be  soldered  in  this  manner. 
Take  a  little  of  the  gold  itself,  or  silver,  and  mix  with  it  a  third 
part  of  copper,  and  melting  them  together  you  will  file  it 
finely,  and  wine-stone  being  burnt  and  salt  added,  you  will 
mix  it  with  water ;  thinly  anointing  it  with  which,  spread 
the  fiHng  over  the  fracture.  This  dry,  again  anoint  the  mix- 
ture, more  thickly,  and  coals  being  applied  above  and  below, 
you  will  blow  gently,  until  you  can  see  the  solder  flow.  See- 
ing which,  immediately  sprinkle  it  with  water,  and  if  it  be 
hard,  well ;  if  not,  however,  do  the  like  again  until  it  has  be- 
come firm.  Should  the  fracture,  however,  be  broad,  carefully 
join  a  small  piece  of  the  same  gold  or  silver,  equally  thin,  to 
it,  which  you  will  solder  in  the  like  manner  until  it  adhere 
everywhere.  And  when  the  rehef  of  the  figures  shall  have 
been  carried  to  the  point  of  the  chasings,  should  it  be  gold, 
you  immediately  make  them,  and  polish  carefully,  and  you 
will  colour  it  with  "  atrament,"  ^  burnt  to  redness,  and  salt, 
as  above  in  the  work  of  the  chalice.  Should,  however,  the 
picture  be  silver,  and  you  should  wish  upon  these  figures  to 
gild  the  crowns,  the  hair,  beard  and  portions  of  the  draperies, 
this  should  be  done  before  the  fine  lines  are  made,  in  this 
manner.  Arrange  two  parts  only  of  clay,  finely  ground,  and 
a  third  of  salt,  and  mix  them  together  in  a  small  vessel  with 

'     green  vitriol",  or  aulpkate  of  iron.    Trans,  see  note. 


328 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


cooperies  omiie  argentum  quod  volueris  ut  album  remaneat, 
et  quod  deaurandum  est,  maneat  intectum.  Quod  cum  sic- 
caveris  super  prunas,  deaurabis  loca  singula  diligenter  sine 
aqua,  deaurataque  lavabis  ^  et  polita  incolorabis.  Deinde 
cum  carbonibus  subtiliter  tritis  et  lignis  gracilioribus  et  gross- 
ioribus  fricabis  diligenter,  usque  per  omnia  aeque  clarum  sit. 
Post  hsec  et  in  auro  et  in  argento  fac  subtiles  tractus,  quos  et 
faciendo  pariter  polies,  donee  ad  perfectionem  perducas. 
Cum  vero  tabulas  illas  aureas  vel  argenteas  pleniter  elevatas 
atque  politas  configere  volueris,  tolle  ceram  et  liquefac  in  vase 
fictili  vel  cupreo,  atque  commisce  ei  tegulam  subtiliter  tritam 
sive  sabulum,  ita  ut  sint  hujus  duse  partes  et  cerse  tertia. 
Quod  cum  pariter  liquefactum  fuerit,  cum  cochleari  ligneo 
fortiter  commovebis,  et  inde  implebis  omnes  imagines  in  auro, 
argento,  sive  cupro,  vel  quodcunque  in  his  elevatum  fuerit,  et 
refrigeratum  confige  ubi  velis.  In  cupreis  vero  tabulis  eodem 
modo  attenuatis  simile  opus  fit,  sed  majori  virium  instantia  et 
diligentia,  quam  durioris  naturae  est.  Quod  opus  cum  perve- 
nerit  ed  subtiles  tractus,  debet  in  exteriori  parte  purgari  cum 
laneo  panno  et  sabulo,  donee  nigra  cutis  auferatur,  et  sic 
deaurari  atque  poliri,  perfectisque  decolorari^  tractibus,  et 
praedictis  confectionibus  impleri. 


CAPUT  LXXV. 

DE  OPERE  QUOD  SIGILLIS  INPRIMITUR. 

"IT^IANT  etiam  ferri  ad  mensuram  unius  digiti  spissi,  tribus 
JL  digitis  vel  quatuor  lati,  longitudine  ^  unius,  qui  sanis- 
simi  debent  esse,  ut  in  eis  nulla  sit  macula,  nulla  fissura  in 
superiori  latere.    In  his  sculpantur  in  similitudine  sigillorum 

'  vitiose  "  levabis, "  in  Cod.  HarL 

'  "  incolorari,"  in  Cod.  Guelph. 

^   erbwm  "  pedis/'  in  Cod.  Guelph.  invenitur. 


TRANSLATION. 


329 


the  dregs  of  beer,  moderately  thick,  with  which  mixture  you 
cover  all  the  silver  which  you  may  wish  should  remain  white, 
and  that  which  is  to  be  gilt  can  remain  bare.    When  you 
shall  have  dried  this  over  the  embers,  you  will  gild  the  places 
one  by  one  without  water,  being  gilt,  you  will  wash  it,  and 
polished,  you  will  colour  it.     Then  with  finely  pulverized 
charcoal,  and  with  pieces  of  wood,  larger  and  smaller,  you 
will  rub  it  carefully  until  it  be  equally  bright  everywhere. 
You  afterwards  make  the  fine  lines,  both  on  the  gold  and 
on  the  silver,  which  in  the  making  you  likewise  polish,  until  you 
bring  it  to  perfection.    When  you  wish  to  affix  these  gold  or 
silver  plates  fully  reheved  and  polished,  take  wax  and  melt  it 
in  an  earthenware  or  copper  vessel,  and  mix  tile,  finely  ground, 
with  it,  or  sand,  so  that  there  may  be  two  parts  of  this  and  a 
third  of  wax.     When  this  has  been  likewise  melted,  you 
will  strongly  stir  it  with  a  wooden  spoon,  and  fill  up  all  the 
figures  with  it  in  gold,  silver,  or  copper,  or  whatever  may 
have  been  relieved  in  these,  and  cold,  you  will  attach  it  where 
you  wish.  Also  in  copper  plates,  thinned  in  the  same  manner, 
the  like  work  is  made,  but  with  greater  attention  and  care  as 
to  strength,  as  its  nature  is  more  hard.    When  this  work  has 
been  brought  to  the  fine  lines,  it  should  be  cleaned  on  the 
outside  part  with  a  woollen  cloth  and  sand,  until  the  black 
coat  be  taken  off^  and  so  be  gilt  and  polished,  and  the  draw- 
ings being  finished,  be  coloured  and  filled  with  the  above 
mentioned  composition. 


CHAPTER  LXXV. 

OF  WORK  WHICH   IS   IMPRESSED  WITH  STAMPS. 

Irons  are  also  made,  thick  as  the  size  of  a  finger,  wide  as 
three  or  four  fingers,  in  length  one  (foot  0,  which  should  be 
sound,  that  no  blemish  may  exist  in  them,  no  fissure  in  the 
upper  side.    In  these  are  sculptured,  in  resemblance  of  seals, 

'  This  word  is  wanting  in  the  Harleian  MS.,  it  is  supplied  from  the  Wolfen- 
biittel  MS. 


330 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


331 


borders  slender  and  wide,  in  which  can  be  flowers,  animals 
and  small  birds,  or  dragons  link'ed  together  by  the  necks  and 
tails,  and  they  are  not  sculptured  too  deeply,  but  moderately 
and  carefully.  You  will  then  thin  silver,  much  more  thinly 
than  for  the  relief,  of  the  length  you  wish,  and  you  will 
cleanse  it  with  charcoal,  finely  pulverized,  and  a  cloth ;  you 
polish  it  with  chalk  scraped  upon  it. 

Which  being  done,  affix  the  silver  to  any  border,  and  the 
iron  being  placed  upon  an  anvil,  so  that  the  engraving  may 
be  uppermost,  and  the  silver  lying  upon  it,  place  above  it 
some  thick  lead  and  strike  strongly  with  the  hammer,  so  that 
the  lead  may  beat  upon  the  thin  silver,  into  the  sculpture,  so 
strongly,  that  all  the  designs  may  fully  appear  in  it.  But 
should  the  plate  be  longer  (than  the  stamp)  draw  it  from  place 
to  place,  and,  affixed  to  the  iron,  hold  it  evenly  with  the  pin- 
cers, and  one  part  being  struck,  another  can  be  hammered, 
and  do  thus  until  all  the  plate  be  filled  up.  This  kind  of 
work  is  rather  useful,  about  the  borders,  in  manufacturing 
the  tables  of  altars,  in  pulpits,  in  caskets  for  sacred  sub- 
stances, and  in  whatever  places  needful ;  and  when  the  relief 
is  beautiful  and  delicate,  it  is  easily  done.  Work  of  this  kind 
is  also  made  in  copper,  which  is  thinned  in  a  similar  manner, 
is  cleansed  and  gilt  and  polished ;  this  placed  upon  the  iron, 
so  that  the  gilding  be  turned  towards  the  iron,  the  lead  being 
superposed,  it  is  struck  until  the  designs  appear.  The  image 
of  the  crucifixion  of  the  Lord  is  also  sculptured  in  iron,  in  the 
above  mentioned  manner,  of  which,  when  impressed  upon 
silver  or  copper,  phylacteria  are  made,  that  is,  coffers  of  relics 
and  small  shrines  of  saints.  A  sculpture  is  also  made  in  iron 
of  the  image  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  the  figures  of  the  four 
evangelists,  with  which,  impressed  upon  gold  or  silver,  the 
cups  of  precious  wood  are  ornamented,  the  circle  of  the  lamb 
standing  in  the  middle  of  the  cup,  the  four  evangelists  in 
fashion  of  a  cross  around,  and  with  four  borders  proceeding 
from  the  lamb  to  the  four  evangehsts  ;  figures  of  small  fish 
and  of  birds  and  beasts  are  made,  which  are  fixed  upon  the 
remaining  ground  of  the  cup,  affording  much  ornament. 
The  image  of  the  Divinity  is  also  made  in  the  same  manner, 


332 


THEOPHILl  LIBER  JJI. 


que  formae  et  sexus,  quae  impressse  auro  vel  argento  seu  cu- 
pro  deaiirato,  plurimum  decoris  praestant  locis,  quibus  inpo- 
nuiitur,  propter  subtilitatem  et  operositatem.  Fiunt  et  ima- 
gines regum  et  equitum  eodem  modo  ferro,  ex  quibus  auri- 
calco  Hispanico  inpressis  ornantur  pelves,  quibus  aqua  in 
rnanibus  funditur,  eodem  modo  quo  ornantur  scyphi  auro  vel 
argento,  cum  suis  limbis  ejusdem  metalli,  in  quibus  bestiolae 
vel  aves  et  flosculi,  qui  tamen  non  configuntur,  sed  stagno 
solidantur. 


CAPUT  LXXVL 

DE  CLAVIS. 

FIUNT  autem  clavi  ferrei  longitudine  unius  digiti,  in  una 
summitate  grossiores,  in  altera  graciliores,  in  qua  etiam 
chalybe  solidandi  sunt,  quorum  unus  limetur  quadrangulus, 
alius  triangulus,  tertius  rotundus,  secundum  convenientem 
grossitudinem.  Deinde  sculpantur  in  eis  flosculi  eodem 
modo,  quo  supra,  ita  ut  ora  ferri  circa  flosculum  acuta  fiat. 
Cumque  valde  attenuatum  fuerit  argentum  sive  cuprum  de- 
auratum,  vel  auricalcum,  in  superiori  parte  polies,  ut  supra ;  in 
inferiori  vero  supers tagnabis  valde  tenue  cum  ferro,  quo  fe- 
nestrse  solida'ntur,  ponesque  plumbum  spissum  super  incudem 
et  desuper  argentum,  sive  cuprum  deauratum,  ita  ut  deaura- 
tura  superius  sit  et  stagnum  inferius ;  sumptoque  uno  ex  ferris, 
quale  velis,  junge  sculpturam  ad  argentum,  percutiesque 
malleo  ita  ut  sculptura  in  eo  appareat,  et  cum  acuta  ora  ferri 
in  circuitu  incidatur.  Quod  cum  per  totum  argentum  feceris, 
serva  tibi  flosculos  omnes,  quia  illi  erunt  capita  clavorum, 
quorum  caudas  hoc  modo  facies.  Commisce  duas  partes 
stagni,  et  tertiam  plumbi,  et  percute  illud  gracile  et  longum, 
deinde  pertrahe  per  foramina  ferri,  in  quo  fila  trahuntur,  ita 
ut  longissimum  filum  habeat,  et  non  gracile  nimis,  sed  me- 


TRANSLATION. 


333 


and  other  figures  of  any  form  or  sex,  which  bemg  impressed 
upon  gold  or  silver,  or  gilt  copper,  give  the  greatest  ornament 
to  the  places  upon  which  they  are  placed,  on  account  of  their 
fineness  and  labour.  The  figures  of  kings  and  knights  are 
also  made  in  the  same  manner  in  iron,  with  which,  impressed 
upon  Spanish  brass,  the  basins,  from  which  water  is  poured 
upon  the  hands,  are  ornamented  in  the  same  manner  in  which 
cups  are  embellished,  with  gold  or  silver,  with  their  borders 
of  the  same  metal,  in  which  are  small  animals  or  birds  and 
flowers,  which,  however,  are  not  fixed  together,  but  are  sol- 
dered with  tin. 


CHAPTER  LXXVI. 

OF  NAILS. 

Iron  nails  are  made  the  length  of  a  finger,  thicker  at  one  end, 
more  pointed  at  the  other,  in  which  also  they  are  to  be  made 
strong  with  steel,  of  which  one  is  filed  square,  another  tri- 
angular, a  third  round,  according  to  the  size  convenient. 
Small  flowers  are  then  sculptured  upon  them  in  the  same 
manner  as  above,  so  that  the  rim  of  the  iron  around  the 
flower  may  become  sharp.  And  w^hen  silver,  or  gilt  copper, 
or  brass,  has  been  well  thinned,  you  polish  it  upon  the  upper 
surface  as  above ;  but  on  the  tower  you  will  tin  it  over  very 
thinly,  with  the  iron  with  which  windows  are  soldered,  and 
you  place  thick  lead  upon  the  anvil  and  the  silver  or  gilt 
copper  upon  it,  so  that  the  gilding  may  be  upwards  and  the 
tin  below ;  and  one  of  the  irons  being  taken,  whichever  you 
may  wish,  apply  the  sculpture  to  the  silver,  and  strike  with 
the  hammer,  so  that  the  sculpture  may  appear  upon  it,  and 
it  may  be  cut  around  with  the  sharp  rim  of  the  iron.  When 
you  have  done  this  through  all  the  silver,  keep  all  the  small 
flowers  by  you,  because  they  will  be  the  heads  of  the  nails, 
the  stems  of  which  you  make  in  this  manner.  Mix  together 
two  parts  of  tin  and  a  third  of  lead,  and  beat  it  out  thin  and 
long,  then  draw  it  through  the  openings  of  the  instrument,  in 
which  wires  are  drawn,  so  that  it  may  have  a  long  thread. 


334 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


335 


and  not  too  slender,  but  middling.  After  this  make  for  your- 
self a  thin  iron  half  a  foot  in  length,  which  must  be  rather 
wide  at  one  extremity,  to  the  size  of  your  nail,  and  slightly 
hollow,  and  the  other  end  can  be  fixed  to  a  wooden  handle. 
Then  sitting  near  the  furnace  proper  for  this  work,  before 
which  a  small  copper  vessel  with  melted  wax  can  stand,  and 
in  the  left  hand  holding  the  handle  of  this  thin  iron,  made  hot 
in  the  wider  part,  and  in  the  right  the  tin  wire,  the  extremity 
of  which  rolled  like  a  ball,  you  moisten  in  the  melted  wax, 
and  placing  it  upon  one  of  the  flowers  in  that  part  where  the 
tin  is,  so  that  it  may  adhere,  you  will  raise  it,  and  you  place 
it  in  the  hollow  of  the  heated  iron  and  will  hold  it  until  it 
liquefy,  and  you  will  instantly  remove  both  from  the  fire  and 
you  cut  the  wire  with  the  forceps  according  to  the  length 
which  you  wish  the  stem  of  the  nail  to  possess.  And  you  do 
thus  until  you  expend,  in  nails  of  this  kind,  that  silver  and 
gilt  copper.  And  when  you  have  an  abundance  of  nails,  and 
may  wish  to  fix  them  upon  the  stirrup  leathers  of  a  horse- 
saddle,  or  about  the  head-piece  of  a  bridle,  first  make  holes 
with  the  awl,  and  so  place  the  nails  in  order,  so  that  three 
may  be  golden  and  three  silver,  and  again  three  gold,  and 
similarly  throughout.  But  should  you  wish  to  have  two  or 
three  rows,  always  place  one  silver  and  the  other  golden 
throughout,  and  so  placing  the  strap  with  the  heads  upon  a 
smooth  wooden  table,  fasten  on  the  stems  with  a  middle  sized 
hammer.  Nails  are  also  made  by  the  same  workmanship 
from  brass,  but  thicker,  the  copper  stems  of  which  are  sol- 
dered inside  with  pure  tin  in  the  same  manner.  With  these 
the  sheaths  of  knives  are  fixed,  and  leathers  upon  books,  and 
many  things  of  this  kind. 


CHAPTER  LXXVII. 

OF  SOLDERING  GOLD  AND  SILVER  TOGETHER. 


Silver  of  the  weight  of  twelve  nummi  having  been  purified 
is  beaten  straightly  to  the  length  of  half  the  little  finger,  pre- 


336 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


339 


where  also  you  strike  with  the  same  irons  that  the  designs 
may  be  raised  outside.  When  you  have  done  this  until  the 
figure  be  altogether  formed,  you  sculp  with  the  sculping  and 
scraping  instruments  about  the  eyes  and  nostrils,  the  mouth 
and  chin  and  ears,  and  you  will  design  the  hair  and  all  the  fine 
drawing  of  the  draperies,  and  the  nails  of  the  hands  and  feet. 
Which  being  done,  if  you  wish  to  decorate  the  crowns  of  the 
figures  with  gems,  enamel,  and  pearls,  immediately  work 
single  pieces  in  gold  with  wires  and  solder,  as  above  in  the 
work  of  the  chalice,  and  fitting  each  one  in  its  place,  make 
holes  through  which  they  should  be  fastened  on,  namely, 
under  the  larger  gems,  and  equally  in  the  copper ;  and  you 
will  thus  gild  the  plate,  and  you  polish  it  at  first  with  the 
brass  wires,  as  above,  then  with  the  smooth  irons ;  and  thus 
you  will  colour  it,  and  you  fix  on  the  pieces  of  gold,  each  one 
in  its  place,  and  you  lay  on  the  gems,  and  you  will  fasten  the 
pearls  around.  In  the  same  manner  should  you  possess  fa- 
cihty  of  invention,  you  can  make  figure^  in  gold  and  silver 
upon  the  books  of  the  evangelists  and  missals,  and  animals 
and  small  birds  and  flowers  outside  upon  the  horse-saddles  of 
matrons.  Upon  golden  or  silver  cups  or  platters,  in  the 
middle,  knights  are  made  in  the  same  manner,  fighting 
against  lions  or  griffins;  the  figure  of  Sampson,  or  David 
breaking  the  mouths  of  the  lions ;  lions  alone,  also,  and  grif- 
fins ;  the  same  also,  each  strangling  single  (figures  of)  cattle ; 
or  other  thing  which  it  may  please  you,  and  which  may  be 
proper  and  fit,  according  to  the  size  of  the  work. 


CHAPTER  LXXIX. 

OF   CLEANING  OLD  GILDING. 

Take  soap  and  place  it  in  a  basin,  or  other  clean  vessel,  pour- 
ing clean  water  upon  it,  carefully  mix  it  together,  until  it  be 
as  thick  as  lees,  so  that  it  cannot  flow  wheresoever  it  may  be 
placed.    Then  with  hogs'  bristles  anoint  this  carefully  over 

z  2 


340 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


341 


the  old  gilding  in  copper  or  silver,  which  may  have  lost  its 
brightness,  so  that  it  may  be  entirely  covered,  and  you  allow 
it  so  to  remain  for  a  night.  But  on  the  second  day  you  will 
wash  it  in  water  with  the  same  bristles  once  and  again,  and 
on  the  third  time  pour  clear  water  over  it,  and  you  will  see  it 
shine  so  as  to  gratify  your  eyes. 


CHAPTER  LXXX. 

OF  CLEANSING  GOLD  AND  SILVER. 

If  gold  and  silver,  thinned  into  leaves  and  fixed  anywhere 
by  nails,  has  become  blackened  through  age,  take  black  char- 
coal and  grind  it  very  small  and  sift  it  through  a  cloth,  and 
taking  a  linen  or  woollen  cloth  wetted  with  water,  place  it 
upon  these  coals,  and  raising  it  you  will  rub  it  carefully  over 
all  the  gold  or  silver,  until  you  take  away  all  the  blackness,  and 
thus  you  will  wash  it  with  water,  and  will  dry  it  in  the  sun,  or 
by  the  fire,  or  with  a  cloth ;  then  take  white  chalk,  and  scrape 
it  very  finely  into  a  vessel,  and  thus  you  will  rub  it  dry  with 
a  linen  cloth  upon  the  gold  or  silver  until  it  take  its  original 
lustre.    Vases  are  cleaned  in  the  same  manner. 


CHAPTER  LXXXI, 

OF  ORGANS. 

The  manufacturer  of  organs  should  first  possess  the  know- 
ledge of  the  measure,  how  the  grave  and  sharp  and  treble 
pipes  should  be  meted  out ;  he  may  then  make  for  himself  a 
long  and  thick  iron  to  the  size  which  he  wishes  the  pipes  to 
possess  ;  this  must  be  round,  filed  and  polished  with  great 
care,  thicker  at  one  exhemity  and  slightly  diminished,  so  that 


342 


THEOPHILl  LIBER  III. 


rum  curvum  per  quod  circumdatur,  juxta  modum  ligni  in  quo 
volvitur  runcina,  et  in  altera  summitate  gracile,  secundum 
mensuram  inferioris  capitis  fistulae,  qua  conflatorio  debet  im- 
poni.  Deinde  attenuetur  cuprum  purum  et  sanissimum,  ita 
ut  unguis  impressus  altera  parte  appareat.  Quod  cum  fuerit 
secundum  mensuram  ferri  lineatum  et  incisum  ad  longiores 
fistulas,  quse  dicuntur  graves,  fiat  secundum  prseceptum  lec- 
tionis  foramen,  in  quo  plectrum  imponi  debet,  et  circumradatur 
modice  ad  mensuram  festucse  \  ac  superliniatur  stagnum  ferro 
solidatorio,  radaturque  in  ora  longitudinis  interius,  in  altera 
era  exterius  eadem  mensura,  et  superstagnetur  tenue.  Quse 
stagnatura,  priusquam  rasi  tractus  noviter  facti,  modice  cale- 
facto  cupro  lineantur  cum  resina  abietis,  ut  stagnum  facilius 
adhaereat.  Quo  facto  complicetur  ipsum  cuprum  circa  ferrum 
et  circumligetur  filo  ferreo  mediocriter  grosso  fortiter,  ita  ut 
stagnati  tractus  conveniant  sibi.  Quod  filum  primo  induci 
debet  parvulo  foramini,  quod  est  in  gracili  summitate  ferri,  et 
in  eo  bis  contorqueri,  sicque  deduci  in  volvendo  usque  ad  al- 
teram summitatem,  ibique  similiter  obfirmari.  Deinde  junc- 
turis  sibi  convenientibus  et  diligenter  conjunctis,  ponatur  ipsa 
ligatura  pariter  cum  ferro  ante  fornacem  super  prunas  ardentes, 
et  sedente  puero  et  mediocriter  flante,  teneatur  dextera  manu 
lignum  gracile,  in  cujus  summitate  fissa,  adhaereat  panniculus 
cum  resina,  et  sinistra  teneatur  stagnum  longum  gracile  percus- 
sum,  ut  mox  cum  fistula  incaluerit,  lineat  juncturam  cum  pan- 
niculo  resina  infecto,  appositumque  stagnum  liquefiat,  ipsamque 
juncturam  ^  diligenter  consolidet.  Quo  factore  frigerata  fistula, 
ponatur  ferrum  in  instrumento  tornatoris  more  parato,  in  posito 
que  curvo  ferro  et  filo  soluto  circum  volvat  unus  ferrum  cur- 
vum, alter  vero,  utrisque  manibus  chirothecis  '  indutis,  fistulam 
fortiter  teneat,  ita  ut  ferrum  circumducatur  et  fistula  quieta 

'  '*  fistulse,"  in  Cod.  Ouelpk. 
'  addidivms  ex  Cod.  Guelph. 
^  Hie  codex  "  cyrotecis  "  habet. 


TRANSLATION.  343 

it  can  be  placed  in  another  curved  iron,  by  which  it  is  en- 
compassed, after  the  fashion  of  the  wood  in  which  the  auger 
is  revolved,  and  at  the  other  extremity  let  it  be  slender,  ac- 
cording to  the  size  of  the  lower  end  of  the  pipe  which  should 
be  placed  on  the  bellows.  Then  pure  and  very  sound  copper 
is  thinned,  so  that  the  impression  of  the  nail  may  appear  on 
the  other  side.  When  this  has  been  marked  out  and  cut 
according  to  the  size  of  the  iron  for  the  longer  pipes,  which 
are  called  grave,  an  opening  is  made  according  to  the  precept 
of  the  lesson,  into  which  the  valve  should  be  placed,  and  it 
is  rasped  round  a  little  to  the  size  of  the  rod  \  and  tin  is 
anointed  over  it  with  the  soldering  iron,  and  it  is  rasped  upon 
one  edge  of  the  length  inside,  and  outside,  upon  the  other 
edge,  and  it  is  tinned  over  thinly.  Which  tinnings,  before 
the  newly  made  lines  are  scraped,  are  slightly  anointed,  the 
copper  being  warmed  with  resin  of  the  fir,  that  the  tin  may 
the  more  easily  adhere.  Which  being  done  this  copper  is 
folded  around  the  iron  and  is  strongly  bound  round  with  an 
iron  wire  moderately  thick,  so  that  the  tinned  lines  may 
agree  with  each  other.  This  wire  should  be  first  carried 
through  a  very  small  hole  which  is  at  the  thin  extremity  of 
the  iron,  and  be  twisted  twice  round  in  it,  and  so  be  carried 
down  revolving  to  the  other  extremity,  and  be  there  similarly 
fastened.  Then  with  its  joinings  agreeing  together  and  care- 
fully fastened,  it  is  placed  with  its  Hgature,  as  with  the  iron, 
before  the  furnace  upon  the  glowing  embers,  and  the  boy 
sitting  and  sHghtly  blowing,  in  the  left  hand  is  held  a  thin 
wood,  at  the  split  top  of  which  a  small  cloth  with  resin  is 
fixed,  and  in  the  right  can  be  held  a  long  piece  of  tin  beaten 
thin,  so  that  directly  the  pipe  has  become  hot  he  can  anoint 
the  join  with  the  rag  filled  with  resin,  and  the  tin  applied 
may  liquefy,  and  he  must  carefully  solder  the  join  together. 
Which  being  done,  the  pipe  cold,  the  iron  is  placed  in  the 
instrument  prepared  like  that  of  a  turner,  and  the  curved 
iron  being  placed  on,  and  wire  loosened,  one  (hand)  can  re- 
volve the  curved  iron,  the  other,  both  hands  being  provided 
with  gloves,  can  hold  the  pipe  firmly,  so  that  the  iron  may 

'  "  pipe/'  in  the  WolfenbUttel  MS. 


344 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


345 


be  earned  round  and  the  pipe  remain  still,  until  it  appear 
elegant  to  the  eyes,  as  if  turned.  The  iron  being  then 
taken  out,  the  pipe  is  struck  slightly  with  the  hammer  near 
the  opening,  above  and  below,  so  that  this  round  shape  may 
depress  almost  to  the  centre  for  a  space  of  two  fingers ;  the 
valve  may  be  made  from  copper  somewhat  thicker,  like  a 
half  wheel,  and  be  soldei-ed  over  about  the  round  part,  as 
the  pipe  above,  and  be  so  placed  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
opening  that  its  edge  may  stand  equally  under  it,  nor  pro- 
trude below  or  above.  He  can  have  also  a  soldering  iron  of 
the  same  breadth  and  roundness  as  is  the  valve.  With  this, 
heated,  he  can  place  siiiall  particles  of  tin  upon  the  valve, 
and  a  little  resin,  and  can  carefully  pass  over  the  hot  iron 
that  he  may  not  move  the  valve,  but  that  the  tin  being  melted 
it  may  so  adhere  that  no  wind  can  come  out  in  its  circum- 
ference, unless  only  into  the  upper  opening.  Which  being  done 
he  can  bring  it  to  his  mouth  and  blow  at  first  slightly,  then 
more,  and  then  strongly ;  and  according  to  what  he  discerns 
by  hearing,  he  can  arrange  the  sound,  so  that  if  he  wish  it 
strong,  the  opening  is  made  wider;  if  slighter,  however,  it  is 
made  narrower.  In  this  order  all  the  pipes  are  made  ;  he  can 
make  the  measure  of  each,  from  the  valve  upwards,  according 
to  the  rule  inculcated,  but  from  the  valve  below,  all  will  be  of 
one  measure  and  of  the  same  thickness'. 


CHAPTER  LXXXII. 

OF  THE  ORGAN  ERECTION. 

In  the  manufacture  of  the  construction,  upon  which  the  pipes 
are  to  stand,  see  whether  you  intend  to  have  it  of  wood  or 
copper.  If  of  wood,  procure  for  yourself  two  pieces  of  wood 
of  the  plane  tree,  very  dry,  two  feet  and  a  half  in  length,  and 
in  breadth  rather  more  than  one;  one  four,  the  other  two 
fingers  thick,  which  must  not  be  knotty,  but  without  blemish. 
Which  being  carefully  joined  together,  in  the  lower  part  of 

'  Here  end  the  most  voluminous  of  the  MSS.  of  Theophilus  hitherto  known. 


346 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


347 


the  thicker  wood  a  square  hole  must  be  made  in  the  centre, 
four  fingers  in  breadth,  and  about  which,  borders  must  be  left 
of  the  same  wood  of  one  finger  in  breadth  and  height,  in 
which  the  bellows  can  be  placed.  In  the  upper  part  of  the 
side,  however,  small  hollows  are  made,  through  which  the 
wind  can  arrive  at  the  pipes.  But  the  other  part  of  the 
wood,  which  should  also  be  uppermost,  is  measured  out  in- 
side equally,  where  seven  or  eight  small  openings  are  dis- 
posed, in  which  the  stops  are  carefully  joined,  so  that  they 
may  have  an  easy  means  of  being  drawn  out  or  restored,  so 
however,  that  no  air  can  come  out  between  the  joins, 

In  the  upper  part,  however,  cut  small  openings  opposite 
the  lower  ones,  which  may  be  rather  wider,  in  which  may  be 
joined  so  many  pieces  of  wood,  so  that  between  these  and 
the  larger,  the  openings  of  the  wood  may  remain  empty 
through  which  the  wind  can  mount  to  the  pipes ;  for  in  these 
same  pieces  of  wood  openings  should  be  made  in  which  the 
pipes  are  to  be  made  fast,  The  openings  in  which  the  stops 
are  fitted  in  the  front  part  should  increase,  like  slanting  win- 
dows, through  which  these  stops  are  introduced  and  removed. 

In  the  hinder  part,  under  the  end  of  these  stops,  holes  are 
made  equally  wide  and  long  of  the  size  of  two  fingers,  through 
which  the  wind  can  ascend  from  the  lower  to  the  upper  parts, 
so  that  when  the  stops  are  pressed  upon  them  these  holes 
may  be  stopped  by  them  ;  when,  however,  they  are  withdrawn 
they  may  again  lie  open.  In  those  pieces  of  wood  which  are 
joined  upon  the  stops  openings  are  made,  carefully  and  in 
order,  according  to  the  number  of  the  pipes  of  every  tone, 
in  which  these  pipes  are  placed,  so  that  they  may  stand  firmly 
and  receive  the  wind  from  the  lower  parts.  But  in  the  handles 
of  the  stops  letters  are  marked,  according  to  the  rise  and  fall 
of  the  sound,  by  which  it  can  be  known  which  tone  it  may 
be.  In  each  one  of  the  stops  single  slender  holes  are  made, 
half  of  the  little  finger  in  length,  in  the  front  part,  near  the 
handles,  lengthwise,  in  which  single  copper  headed  nails  may 
be  placed,  which  may  pass  through  the  small  windows  in  the 
middle,  by  means  of  which  these  stops  are  drawn  from  the 
upper  side  of  the  construction  down  to  the  lower,  and  the 


348 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


superius  ita,  ut  cum  linguae  cantantibus  organis  educuntur, 
non  penitus  extrahantur.  His  ita  dispositis  conglutinentur 
haec  duo  ligna,  quae  domum  organorum  conficiunt  glutine 
casei ;  deinde  partes  illae  quae  super  Jinguas  sunt  junctae,  in 
quibus  foramina  stant,  sicque  circumcidantur  diligenter  et  ra- 
dantur. 


CAPUT  LXXXIIL 

DE  CONFLATORIO. 

CONFLATORIUM  facturus,  conjunge  tibi  duo  ligna  de 
platano  modo  quo  supra,  longitudine  pedis  unius,  quo- 
rum sit  una  palma  spissum,  alterum  tribus  digitis,  sintque  in 
una  fronte  rotunda  in  modum  scuti,  et  ibi  pede  et  dimidio 
lata;  in  altera  fronte  obtusa,  latitudine  unius  palmi.  Quae 
cum  diligenter  conjuncta  fuerint  incide  in  spissiori  ligno  in 
rotunda  fronte  foramina  quod  volueris,  secundum  numerum 
follium,  et  in  obtusa  fronte  unum,  quod  sit  majus.  Deinde 
incide  ab  unoquoque  foramine  fossam  unam  deductim  usque 
ad  majus,  per  quas  viam  possit  habere  ventus  flantibus  follibus. 
Sicque  conglutinabis  ipsa  ligna  glutine  casei,  et  circumdabis 
panno  lineo  novo  et  forti,  quern  linies  eodem  glutine  ut  ad- 
haereat,  facies  quoque  ligaturas  ferreas  fortes,  interius  et  ex- 
terius  circumstagnatas,  ne  possint  ex  tignea  ^  dissolvi,  quas 
configes  clavis  longis  capitatis  atque  stagnatis,  ita  ut  inter 
duo  foramina  ligatura  sit,  quae  comprehendat  utrumque  lignum 
a  superius  latere  usque  ad  inferius.  Deinde  acquire  tibi  lignum 
curvum  de  quercu,  sanum  et  forte,  quod  habeat  in  una  fronte, 
a  curvatura  longitudinem  pedis  unius,  in  altera  duorum,  quod 
perforabis  in  utraque  fronte  terebro  magno,  quo  forantur 
medioli  in  rotis  aratri.  Sed  quia  foramina  non  possunt  sibi 
obviare  propter  curvaturam,  fac  tibi  ferrum  quod  habeat 

'  ex  tignaria  ?  quasi  opere. 


TRANSLATION. 


349 


heads  of  the  nails  appear  above,  so  that  when  the  stops  are 
withdrawn  from  the  sounding  instruments,  they  cannot  be 
quite  extracted.  These  things  being  tlius  arranged,  these  two 
pieces  of  wood,  which  perfect  the  organ  house,  are  joined  to- 
gether with  cheese-glue;  then  those  parts  which  are  joined 
over  the  stops,  in  which  the  holes  exist,  are  also  pared  round 
carefully,  and  scraped. 


CHAPTER  LXXXITI. 

OF  THE  BELLOWS. 

In  making  the  wind-chamber,  join  together  two  pieces  of  wood 
of  the  plane  tree,  in  the  above  mode,  of  one  foot  in  length,  one 
of  which  may  be  a  palm  thick,  the  other  three  fingers,  and  let 
them  be  round  at  one  end,  like  a  shield,  and  there  a  foot  and 
a  half  wide,  at  the  other  end  blunt,  a  palm  in  breadth.  When 
these  have  been  carefully  fitted  together,  cut,  in  the  round 
front  in  the  thicker  wood,  the  openings  which  you  wish,  ac- 
cording to  the  number  of  the  bellows,  and  in  tlie  blunt  end 
one,  which  must  be  larger.  Then  cut,  from  each  opening,  a 
hollow  leading  to  the  larger  opening,  through  which  the  wind 
may  have  way  to  the  working  bellows;  and  you  will  thus 
glue  these  woods  together  with  the  cheese-glue,  and  you  will 
bind  them  round  with  a  linen  cloth,  new  and  strong,  which 
you  anoint  with  the  same  casein  glue  that  it  may  adhere :  you 
also  make  strong  iron  bindings  tinned  over  within  and  with- 
out, that  they  may  not  become  disunited  from  the  woodwork, 
these  you  will  fix  on  with  long  nails,  headed  and  tinned,  so 
that  between  two  openings  a  binding  may  exist,  which  may 
include  each  wood  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  side.  Then 
procure  for  yourself  a  curved  piece  of  oak  wood,  sound  and 
strong,  which  must  have  at  one  end,  from  the  curve,  the 
length  of  one  foot,  in  the  other  of  two,  which  you  will  pierce 
in  each  end  with  a  large  auger,  wath  which  the  middle  por- 
tions are  pierced  in  the  wheels  of  ploughs.  But  because  the 
openings  cannot  meet  together,  on  account  of  the  curve,  make 


350 


THEOPHILT   LTBER  III. 


caput  rotundum  in  modum  ovi,  et  caudam  longam  gracilem, 
qu'de  imponatur  manubrio,  sitque  juxta  caput  modice  curvum, 
cum  quo  calefacto,  combures  foramina  interius  in  curvatura, 
donee  sibi  sequaliter  conveniant.  Quo  facto,  incide  ipsum 
lignum  '  quadrico  statum,  ita  ut  in  unoquoque  latere  uno 
pal  mo  latum  sit,  ad  menvsuram  conflatorii  in  obtusa  parte. 
Post  haec  conjunge  ipsum  lignum  in  longiori  parte,  ad  infe- 
rius  foramen  domus  organariae,  ita  ut  eidem  ligno  cauda  inci- 
datur,  unius  pollicis  longa,  quae  ipsi  foramini  inponatur,  vel 
inferatur,  et  junctura  tam  subtiles  sit,  ut  nichil  flatus  inter 
eam  exire  quaeat.  Alteram  vero  frontem  conjunges  eodem 
modo  ad  conflatorium,  et  ipsum  lignum  glutine  casei  firmabis, 
atque  circumvolves  panno  totum  lignum  cum  junctura,  cui 
etiam  circumfiges  cuprum  latum  quod  utriusque  ligni  oram 
capiat.  His  ita  completis,  si  volueris  organa  ultra  maceriam 
muri  stabilire,  ita  ut  infra  monasterium  nichil  appareat,  nisi  sola 
domus  cum  fistulis,  et  ex  altera  parte  muri  folles  jaceant,  ita 
oportebit  te  ipsam  domum  convertere  ut  linguae  versus  folles 
extrahantur,  et  in  ipso  muro  arcus  fiat  in  quo  cautor  sedeat, 
cujus  sedes  ita  aptetur,  ut  pedes  supra  conflatorium  teneat. 
Est  autem  foramen  quadrum  in  medio  arcus  trans  maceriam, 
per  quod  domus  cum  fistulis  exponitur ;  et  super  collum  con- 
flatorii, quod  in  muro  infra  foramen  lapidibus  obfirmatum 
est,  in  sua  junctura  sistitur,  atque  super  duos  clavos  ferreos 
aequaliter  in  muro  confixos  nititur,  cui  foramini  fenestra  lignea 
appendet,  quae  dum  clausa,  sera  et  clave  munitur,  nemo 
ignotus  superveniens  congnoscere  valet  quid  in  ea  contineatur. 
Exterius  quoque,  super  organa,  pannus  spissus  lignis  interius 
extensus,  in  modum  domunculae,  a  laqueari  in  funiculo  ad 
arcendum  pulverem  depend  eat,  qui  funiculus  super  ipsum 
laquear  circa  rotulam  arte  compositus,  dum  cantandum  est 
organis  trahitur,  et  domunculam  elevat,  finitoque  cantu,  denuo 


quadrato  1 


TRANSLATION. 


351 


for  yourself  an  iron  which  may  have  a  round  head,  like  an 
egg,  and  a  long  thin  stem,  which  is  fitted  with  a  handle,  and 
let  it  be  sHghtly  curved,  near  the  head,  with  which,  made  hot, 
you  burn  the  holes  curved  inside,  until  they  meet  together  in 
an  even  manner.  Which  being  done,  cut  this  wood  in  a  square 
manner,  set  so  that  it  be  one  palm  wide  in  each  side,  to  the  size 
of  the  wind-chamber  in  the  blunt  part.  After  these  things  join 
this  wood  on  the  longer  part,  to  the  lower  opening  of  the  organ 
construction,  so  that  a  projection  may  be  cut  to  the  same 
wood  a  thumb  in  length,  which  can  be  placed,  or  forced  into 
this  opening,  and  that  the  join  be  so  subtle  that  no  wind  can 
escape  from  it.  You  join  on  in  the  same  manner  the  other 
end  to  the  bellows,  and  will  fasten  this  wood  with  cheese 
glue,  and  will  wrap  round  the  whole  wood,  with  the  join, 
with  cloth,  to  which  you  also  fix  a  wide  piece  of  copper  which 
may  also  compass  the  edge  of  each  wood.  These  things 
being  thus  completed,  should  you  wish  to  establish  the  organ 
beyond  the  masonry  of  the  wall,  so  that  nothing  may  appear 
beneath  the  cloister,  unless  the  erection  alone  with  the 
pipes,  and  that  the  bellows  may  extend  from  the  other  side, 
you  must  so  turn  the  construction  that  the  stops  may  be 
drawn  out  towards  the  bellows,  and  an  arch  may  be  made  in 
the  wall  itself  in  which  the  chanter  can  sit,  whose  seat  is  so 
adapted  that  he  can  keep  his  feet  above  the  bellows.  There 
is  also  a  square  opening  in  the  middle  of  the  arch  through 
the  masonry,  through  which  the  construction  with  the  pipes 
is  laid  out ;  and  upon  the  neck  of  the  bellows  which  is  in  the 
wall,  beneath,  the  opening  is  made  firm  with  stones,  it  is  sup- 
ported at  its  junction,  and  is  rested  upon  two  long  iron  nails 
evenly  fixed  in  the  wall ;  to  this  opening  a  wooden  window 
hangs,  which,  when  shut,  is  defended  by  a  lock  and  key,  that 
no  stranger  coming  unawares  be  able  to  learn  what  may  be 
contained  in  it.  Outside  also,  above  the  organ,  a  thick 
drapery,  extended  inside  with  wood  like  a  dome,  for  warding 
off  the  dust,  can  hang  by  a  rope  from  the  ceiling,  which  rope 
arranged  with  art  around  a  wheel  above  the  ceiling  itself,  is 
drawn  whilst  the  organ  is  sounding,  and  thus  raises  the  roof, 
and  the  chant  being  finished,  it  is  lowered  upon  the  organ. 


352 


THEOPHILI    LIBER  111. 


super  organa  deponitur.  Habet  quoqiie  ipsa  domuncula 
pinnara  ex  eodem  paniio,  lignis  quatuor  in  speciem  trianguli 
extensara,  in  ciijus  summo^  spemla  lignea  stet,  cui  funiculus 
inhseret.  Folles  et  instrumentum  super  quod  jaceant,  secundum 
situm  loci  ad  libitos  tuos  dispone. 


CAPUT  LXXXIV. 

DE   ])OMO   CUPREA   ET  CONFLATORIO  EJUS. 

SECUNDUM  abundantiani  ftstulamm  dispone  longitudi- 
nem  et  latitudinem  domus,  et  fac  formani  in  argilla  ma- 
cerata,  siccatamque  diligenter  incide  quacunque  mensura 
volueris,  et  cooperi  cera,  diligenter  inter  duas  aequaliter  spissas 
hastulas  cum  rotundo  ligno  attenuata.  Deinde  incide  fora- 
mina linguaruni  in  ipsa  cera,  et  foramen  inferius,  per  quod 
ventus  introeat;  additis  spiraculis,  cum  infusorio  cooperi 
eadem  aroilla  semel,  et  iterum  ac  tertio.  Cunque  siccata 
fuerit  forma,  eodem  modo  funde  quo  supra  formam  turibuii. 
(^onflatorium  quoque  formabis  in  argilla  procedentibus  undi- 
que  inferius  venti  aditibus,  ad  similitudinem  radicis  unius 
arboris,  et  in  summo  in  unum  foramen  convenientibus.  Quod 
cum  mensurate  dispositum  cultello  incideris,  cooperi  cera,  et 
fac  sicut  supra.  Cumque  domus  fuderis  conjunges  interius 
altitudine  unius  digiti  a  fundo,  tabulam  cupream  ductilem  sub 
foraminibus  linguarum  sequaliter,  ut  supra  eam  ipsae  linguae 
jaceant,  ita  ut  possint  tp.qualiter  produci  etinduci,  illitisque  ipsis 
linouis  teuui  argilla,  reliquum  domus  perfundes  liquefacto 
plumbo,  per  omnia,  super  ipsas  linguas  usque  ad  sumuium. 
Quo  facto,  ejicies  ipsum  plumbum  diligenter  designabisque 
foramina  fistularum  in  lingui- ;  delude  in  ipso  plumbo  et  cum 
gracili  ferro,  vel  terebro,  perforabis  diligentissime.  Deinde 
sub  Unguis  ventorum  aditibus^  facies,  induces  ipsas  linguas 
singulas  in  suis  locis,  atque  repones  plumbum  et  cum  malleo 


•  splierula  / 


*  ''aditus"  ihio. 


TRANSLATION. 


353 


This  dome  also  has  a  spire,  made  from  the  same  cloth,  ex- 
tended by  four  pieces  of  wood  in  shape  of  a  triangle,  at  the  top 
of  which  a  small  wooden  ball  can  stand,  to  which  the  rope 
cleaves.  The  bellows  and  the  instrument  upon  which  they 
may  lie,  arrange  at  your  pleasure  according  to  the  situation 
of  the  spot. 


CHAPTER  LXXXIV. 

OF  THE  COPPER  CONSTRUCTION  AND  ITS  BELLOWS. 

Dispose  the  length  and  width  of  the  case  according  to  the 
number  of  the  pipes,  and  make  a  mould  in  beaten  clay,  and 
being  dry  cut  it  to  whatever  size  you  may  wish,  and  cover  it 
with  wax  carefully  thinned,  between  two  rods  equally  thick, 
with  the  round  wood.  Then  cut  the  openings  of  the  stops  in 
this  wax,  and  the  hole  below  through  which  the  wind  can 
enter ;  the  air-holes  with  the  funnel  being  added,  cover  alto- 
gether with  the  same  clay,  and  again,  and  a  third  time.  And 
when  the  mould  has  become  dry,  cast  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  form  of  the  censer  abovementioned.  You  will  also 
fashion  the  bellows  in  clay,  the  wind-issues  proceeding  every- 
where below  in  the  similitude  of  the  roots  of  a  tree,  and  meet- 
ing at  the  top  in  one  opening.  Which,  when  disposed  in 
rule  you  have  cut  with  a  knife,  cover  with  wax  and  act  as 
above.  And  when  you  have  cast  the  case,  you  join,  inside, 
at  the  height  of  one  finger  from  the  bottom,  a  beaten  copper 
plate,  in  an  even  manner  under  the  openings  of  the  stops,  that 
these  stops  may  rest  upon  it,  so  that  they  can  be  smoothly 
drawn  forth  and  returned ;  and  lining  these  stops  with  thin 
clay,  you  pour  over  the  rest  of  the  case  some  melted  lead 
everywhere,  over  these  stops  up  to  the  top.  This  being  done, 
you  cast  out  this  lead  and  will  carefully  mark  the  openings  of 
the  pipes  in  the  stops;  then  you  will  most  carefully  perforate 
in  this  lead  with  a  thin  iron  or  with  a  bore.  Then  you  make 
the  issues  for  the  wind  under  the  stops  ;  you  introduce  these 
stops  singly  in  their  places,  and  you  replace  the  lead  and  you 

A  A 


354 


THEOPHILT  LIBER  III. 


in  percutiendo  conjunges  domui,  ut  nichil  spiraminis  exeat, 
nisi  per  foramina  quibus  fistulse  inponendse  sunt.  Cum  vero 
conflatorium  fuerit  fusum  et  limatum,  atque  uniuscujusque 
follis  fistula  suo  inductorio  coaptata,  conjungi  et  firmiter  con- 
solidari  debet  ad  domum  organariam  inferius,  ita  ut  ventus 
suos  aditus  libere  inveniat,  et  per  alias  juncturas  nulla- 
tenus  ^  exeat.  Hoc  quoque  sollerterius  ^  procurandum  est, 
ut  in  capite  uniuscujusque  follis,  ante  foramen  fistulse  suae, 
cuprum  tenue  dependeat,  quod  spiraminis  claudat  aditum,  ita 
ut  cum  follis  flando  deponitur  illud  cuprum  se  elevet,  et  ventus 
pleniter  exeat;  cumque  follis  elevatur  ut  per  ventilabrum 
suum  flatum  resumat,  illud  cuprum  os  ejus  penitus  claudat,  et 
ventum  quem  emisit  redire  non  permittat. 


CAPUT  LXXXV. 

DE  CAMPANIS  FUNDENDIS. 

/^OMPOSITURUS  campanam  primum  incides  tibi  lignum 
siccum  de  quercu,  longum  secundum  quod  vis  habere 
campanam,  ita  ut  ex  utraque  parte  extra  formam  emineat  longi- 
tudine  unius  palmi,  et  quadrum  in  una  summitate  grossius,  in 
aliam  gracilius  et  rotundum,  ut  possit  in  foramine  circumvolvi. 
Sitque  deductim  ^  grossius  et  grossius,  ut  cum  opus  fuerit 
perfectum  facile  possit  educi.  Quod  lignum  in  grossiori  parte 
una  palma  ante  summitatem  incidatur  in  circuitu,  ut  fiat  fossa 
duobus  digitis  lata,  sitque  lignum  ibi  rotundum,  juxta  quam 
fossam  summitas  ipsius  ligni  fiat  tenuis,  ut  in  aliud  lignum 
curvum  jungi  possit,  per  quod  valeat  in  modum  runcinge 
circumverti.  Fiunt  etenim  duo  asseres  longitudine  et  latitu- 
dine  sequales  qui  altrinsecus  conjungantur  et  confirmenter 
quatuor  lignis,  ita  ut  sint  ampli  *  inter  se  secundum  longitu- 
dinem  praedicti  ligni ;   ut  in  uno  assere  fiat  foramen  in  quo 

'  "  nulla  teneus,"  habet  Codex.  ^  "  Sollertiiis,"  imo. 

^  "  dediictum  V  *  "  ampla,"  in  Codice  inven. 


TRANSLATION. 


355 


fit  them  to  tlie  construction  by  beating  with  the  hammer,  so 
that  no  wind  can  issue,  unless  through  the  openings  in 
which  the  pipes  are  placed.  When  the  wind-case  has  been 
cast  and  filed,  and  the  pipe  of  each  air-issue  fitted  to  its 
conductor,  it  should  be  joined  together  and  firmly  soldered 
below  to  the  organ  construction,  so  that  the  wind  may  find 
its  access  fi:'eely,  and  can  in  nowise  issue  through  the  other 
joints.  This  also  is  to  be  carefiilly  provided,  that  a  thin  piece 
of  copper  may  hang  down  before  the  opening  of  its  pipe, 
which  can  close  the  access  of  the  air-hole,  so  that  when  by 
the  breathing  of  the  bellows  this  copper  is  displaced,  it  may 
rise,  and  the  wind  may  freely  issue;  and  when  the  bellows  is 
raised,  so  that  it  may  recover  air  through  its  own  ventilator, 
this  copper  can  quite  close  its  mouth  and  not  permit  the 
wind  which  it  emitted  to  return. 


CHAPTER  LXXXV. 

OF  FOUNDING  BELLS. 

In  making  a  bell,  first  cut  a  dry  piece  of  wood,  as  long  as  you 
wish  to  have  the  bell,  so  that  on  every  side  it  may  protrude 
beyond  the  shape  to  the  length  of  one  palm,  and  let  it  be 
square  at  one  larger  end,  at  the  other  more  pointed  and  round, 
so  that  it  can  be  revolved  in  a  hole.  And  let  it  be  drawn  out 
larger  and  larger,  so  that,  when  the  work  has  been  finished, 
it  can  easily  be  taken  out.  This  wood  must  be  cut  around 
in  the  thicker  part,  one  palm  before  the  end,  that  a  hollow 
may  be  made  two  fingers  wide,  and  let  the  wood  be  there 
round;  near  this  furrow  the  extremity  of  the  wood  is  made 
thin,  that  it  may  be  joined  in  another  curved  wood,  by  which 
it  is  able  to  be  revolved  like  a  lathe.  Two  planks  are  also 
made,  equal  in  length  and  width,  which  are  joined  together 
and  made  firm  with  four  pieces  of  wood,  so  that  they  may  be 
wide  between  each  other  according  to  the  length  of  the  afore- 
said wood ;  a  hole  should  be  made  in  one  plank  in  which  the 

A  A  2 


356 


THEOPHILT   LTBER  ITI. 


convertatur  rotunda  summitas,  et  in  altero  e  contra  aequaliter 
fiat  incisura  duobus  digitis  profunda,  in  qua  volvatur  rotunda 
incisura.  Quo  facto,  sume  ipsum  lignum  et  circumpone  ei 
argillam  fortiter  maceratara,  inprimis  duobus  digitis  spissam, 
qua  diligenter  siccata,  suppone  ei  alteram,  sicque  facies  donee 
forma  compleatur  quantam  earn  habere  volueris,  et  cave  ne 
unquam  superponas  argillam  alteri  nisi  inferior  omnino  sicca 
fuerit.  Deinde  coUoca  ipsam  formam  inter  asseres  super- 
scriptos,  et  sedente  puero  qui  vertat,  cum  ferris,  ad  hoc  opus 
aptis,  tornabis  eam  sicut  volueris  et  tenens  pannum  in  aqua 
madefactum  eam  sequabis. 


Post  haec  tollens  adipem  concide  subtihter  in  vase  atque 
manibus  macera,  confixisque  duobus  sequalibus  lignis  spis- 
situdine  qua  volueris,  super  asserem  aequalem  in  medio 
eorum  positum  adipem  attenuabis,  et  aequabis  cum  ro- 
tundo  ligno,  sicut  cera  superius,  supposita  aqua  ne  ad- 
hereat,  statimque  ita  repente  levabis  et  colocabis  super 
formam,  atque  calido  ferro  circumsolidabis.  Rursum  at- 
tenuans  eodem  modo  unam  partem  adipis,  juxta  priorem 
collocabis,  sicque  facies  donee  formam  cooperies.  Oram  vero 
campanse  ad  libitum  tuum  spissam  facies.  Adipem  autem 
omnino  refrigeratum  ferris  acutis  tornabis,  et  si  quid  rari 
operis  volueris  circa  latera  campanae,  florum,  sive  literarum, 
in  adipe  exarabis,  quatuorque  foramina  triangula  juxta  collum 
ut  melius  tinniat  formabis.  Deinde  argillam  cribratam  et  di- 
ligenter mixtam  superpones,  qua  siccata,  alteram  et  super- 
addes.  Ea  itidem  omnino  siccata  convertes  formam  in  latus, 
atque  leniter  percutiendo  educes  lignum,  rursumque,  elevata 
forma,  foramen  superius  implebis  argilla  molli,  et  curvum  fer- 
rum,  in  quo  batillus  pendere  debet,  in  meditullio  imprimes, 
ita  ut  summitates  ejus  foris  emineant.  Cumque  siccata  fuerit 
argilla,  fac  ut  aequalis  sit  reliquee  forniee,  atque  cooperi  adipe, 
ita  ut  summitates  ferri  in  ipso  abundanter  hsereant.  Post 
haec  forma  collum,  atque  aures,  et  spiraculum  sive  infusorium 


TRANSLATION. 


357 


rounded  top  can  be  turned,  and  in  the  other  alike,  opposite, 
an  incision  must  be  made  two  fingers  deep,  in  which  the 
round  cuttin^^  can  be  revolved.  Which  beino;  done  take  the 
block  itself  and  apply  strongly  beaten  clay  round  it,  first  of"  all 
two  fingers  thick,  which  being  carefully  dry,  apply  another 
upon  it,  and  you  do  thus  until  the  mould  be  supplied  as  you 
may  wish  to  have  it,  and  beware  that  you  never  at  any  time 
superpose  clay  upon  other  (clay),  unless  that  below  has  become 
perfectly  dry.  Then  set  this  mould  between  the  before-men- 
tioned planks,  and,  the  boy  who  can  revolve  it  being  seated,  you 
will  turn  it  as  you  may  wish,  and  holding  a  cloth  moistened 
in  water  you  will  smooth  it. 

After  this,  taking  tallow,  cut  it  up  very  finely  and  macerate 
it  with  the  hands,  and  two  even  pieces  of  wood  being  fixed 
together  of  the  thickness  you  may  wish,  you  will  thin  out 
the  tallow  placed  between  them  upon  an  even  board,  with 
the  wooden  roller,  as  the  wax  above,  water  being  placed 
under  that  it  may  not  adhere,  and  so  you  will  immediately  Hft 
it  suddenly,  and  will  lay  it  upon  the  mould  and  will  fasten 
it  round  with  a  hot  iron.  Again,  thinning  a  piece  of  grease, 
in  the  same  manner,  you  will  fasten  it  next  to  the  first, 
and  do  thus  until  you  cover  the  mould.  You  make  the 
rim  of  the  bell  of  the  thickness  you  please.  You  will 
turn  the  grease,  when  quite  cold,  with  sharp  instruments, 
and  should  you  wish  any  ornament  about  the  sides  of  the 
bell,  of  flowers,  or  letters,  you  will  hollow  them  out  in  the 
tallow,  and  will  fashion  four  openings  near  the  neck,  that  it 
may  sound  better.  You  then  superpose  clay,  sifted  and  care- 
fully mixed,  which  being  dry  you  add  other  above  it.  That 
again  being  quite  dry,  you  turn  the  mould  upon  its  side  and 
remove  the  wood  by  striking  gently,  and  the  mould  being 
again  raised  you  will  fill  the  opening  above  with  soft  clay, 
and  you  impress  the  curved  iron,  in  which  the  clapper 
should  hang  in  the  middle,  so  that  its  extremities  may  project 
outside.  And  when  the  clay  has  become  dry,  make  it  even 
with  the  rest  of  mould  and  cover  it  with  tallow,  so  that  the 
ends  of  the  iron  may  adhere  well  in  it.  After  these  things 
form  the  neck,  and  the  handles,  and  the  air-hole,  or  funnel, 


358 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


desuper,  et  cooperi  argilla.  Dumque  tertio  argilla  per  om- 
nia fuerit  siccata,  circumpone  ferreos  circulos  tam  dense,  ut 
non  plus  inter  duos  circulos  quam  latitudo  manus,  quibus  cir- 
culis  duas  argillas  superpone.  Quibus  siccatis  converte  ipsam 
formam  in  latus,  et  in  interiori  argilla,  incide  fossam  magnam 
in  circuitu  et  in  profundo,  ut  non  remaneat  spissior  uno  pede, 
quia  si  integra  esset  forma  interius,  prse  nimio  pondere  non 
possit  levari,  ne  prse  spissitudine  transcoqui. 


Deinde  fac  foveam  in  loco  ubi  volueris  ipsam  formam  subin- 
trare  ad  recoquendum,  profundam  secundum  altitudinem  ejus 
in  latitudine,  et  cum  lapidibus  atque  argilla  fac  in  similitudinem 
fundamenti,  pedem  fortem,  supra  quem  forma  stabit  altitudine 
unius  pedis,  ita  ut  in  medio  ultra  indirectum  remaneat,  spatium 
quasi  via,  pede  et  dimidio  lata,  in  qua  ardeat  ignis  sub  forma. 
Quo  facto  confige  quatuor  ligna  sursum  procedentia  usque  ad 
eequalitatem  terrae,  juxta  ipsum  pedem,  et  statim  reple  foveam 
terra.  Statimque  deduces  ipsam  formam  et  statues  eam  in 
medio  lignorum  illorum  sequaliter  et  ex  una  parte,  sub  ipsa 
forma,  incipe  terram  ejicere.  Cumque  se  inclinaverit,  fode  in 
parte  altera,  donee  se  rursum  illic  inclinet,  sicque  facies  ex 
utraque  parte  quousque  forma  super  pedem  lapideum  sequa- 
liter  sedeat.  Mox  ejectis  lignis,  quse  ad  hoc  solum  contixa 
fuerint,  ut  formam  recte  deducerent,  assumptisque  lapid- 
ibus qui  flammam  possint  sustinere  atque  argilla  fac  oram 
ex  utraque  parte  ante  illud  spatium  vise,  quam  in  me- 
dio pedis  reliquisti,  atque  in  circuitu  operare  fornacem, 
spatio  dimidii  pedis  a  forma.  Cumque  operando  perve- 
neris  ad  medium  formse,  purga  oram  fornacis,  et  in  ora  ip- 
sius  formse  ex  utraque  })arte  fac  unum  foramen,  per  quod 
adeps  possit  effluere,  suppositisque  vasis,  ignem  et  sicca 
ligna  adhibe.  Et  cum  calefacta  forma  cceperit  adeps  exire, 
perfice  pede  tepentem  fornacem  usque  ad  summum  formee, 
et  super  os  pones  operculum  ex  argilla  sive  ex  ferro.  Educto 


TRANSLATION. 


359 


above  them,  and  cover  with  clay.  And  when  the  clay  has  a 
third  time  become  dry,  place  iron  hoops  around  so  closely 
that  there  may  not  be  more  than  the  breadth  of  a  hand  be- 
tween two  hoops,  upon  which  hoops  place  two  layers  of  clay. 
These  being  dry,  turn  the  mould  u|)on  its  side  and  cut  a  large 
hollow  in  the  inside,  in  the  circumference  and  in  depth,  that 
it  may  not  remain  thicker  than  one  foot,  because,  were  the 
mould  whole  within,  it  could  not  be  raised,  on  account  of  the 
exceeding  weight,  nor  be  cooked  through,  for  the  thickness. 

Then  make  a  cave  in  the  place  where  you  wish  this  mould 
to  enter  for  cooking,  deep,  according  to  the  height  of  the 
breadth,  and  make  a  strong  base,  as  a  foundation,  with  stones 
and  clay  upon  which  the  mould  will  stand  at  the  height 
of  one  foot,  so  that  in  the  middle  a  rough  space  as  a  path,  a 
foot  and  a  half  wide,  may  remain  on  either  side,  in  which  the 
fire  can  burn  under  the  mould.  Which  being  done,  fix  four 
posts,  projecting  upwards  to  the  level  of  the  ground,  about 
this  foundation,  and  immediately  fill  up  the  cave  with  earth. 
You  directly  lower  the  mould  and  establish  it  evenly  in  the 
midst  of  these  posts,  and  begin  to  cast  out  the  earth  on  one 
side,  from  under  the  mould.  And  when  it  shall  have  inclined, 
dig  on  the  other  side,  until  it  again  incline  itself  there,  and  do 
thus  on  every  side  until  the  mould  lie  in  an  even  manner 
upon  the  stone  base.  Directly  withdrawing  the  posts,  which 
were  fixed  for  this  purpose  alone,  that  they  might  a^uide  the 
mould  down  straightly,  and  stones  which  can  sustain  the  fire, 
being  taken,  and  clay,  make  the  mouth  of  the  furnace  on 
each  side,  before  that  space  of  the  path  which  you  had  left  in 
the  midst  of  the  base,  and  build  the  furnace  around  at  the 
distance  of  half  a  foot  from  the  mould.  And  when,  in 
working,  you  have  reached  the  middle  of  the  mould,  clear 
the  mouth  of  the  furnace,  and  make  an  opening  in  the  rim  of 
the  mould  itself,  on  each  side,  through  which  the  grease  may 
be  able  to  flow  out,  and  vessels  being  placed  underneath, 
apply  fire  and  dry  wood.  And  when,  the  mould  being  heated, 
the  grease  has  commenced  to  issue  out,  finish  the  warm  fur- 
nace from  the  foot  to  the  top  of  the  mould,  and  lay  a  cover 
over  the  mouth  with  clay  or  iron.    But  the  grease  being 


360 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


361 


utterly  withdrawn,  close  both  openings  with  beaten  clay,  to 
the  proper  measure,  so  that  the  rim  of  the  bell  may  not  be  in- 
jured, and  supply  wood  more  abundantly  about  the  mould,  that 
for  the  whole  day  and  the  following  night  the  fire  may  not 
be  wanting.  In  the  mean  time  take  an  iron  pot,  round  at  the 
bottom,  fit  only  for  this  work,  which  must  have  on  each  side 
two  iron  handles,  or  should  the  bell  be  large,  two  or  three 
(pots)  and  you  anoint  them  inside  and  out  with  clay  beaten 
strongly,  once  and  again  and  a  third  time,  until  it  be  two 
fingers  thick,  and  stand  them  on  either  side  opposite  each 
other,  so  that  there  may  be  way  between  them,  and  place 
simple  earth  under  them,  and  fix  them  round  with  wooden 
stakes,  in  two,  or  if  necessary,  three  places ;  where  the  bel- 
lows should  be  applied  you  fix,  strongly,  two  stakes  equally 
wide,  and  between  them  you  make  an  opening  against  the 
mouth  of  the  pot,  so  that  the  wind  can  come  into  it,  and  in 
separate  holes  you  insert  separate  irons,  thin  and  bent,  so 
that  the  pipes  of  the  bellows  may  be  able  to  lie  in  them  firmly ; 
and  thus  you  make  over  this  pot,  with  stones  and  clay,  a  fur- 
nace around  it,  a  foot  and  a  half  high,  and  you  line  it  inside 
smoothly,  with  the  same  clay,  and  so  apply  ignited  coals. 
And  when  you  have  done  alike  to  the  separate  pots,  set  the 
bellows  with  their  instruments  in  which  they  may  lie  firmly, 
two  to  each  opening,  and  to  each  bellows  you  will  depute  two 
strong  men.  When,  however,  the  inside  of  the  pot  has  be- 
come quite  glowing,  cut,  to  each  one,  two  blocks  of  oak,  dry 
and  thick,  so  fit  that  they  may  be  able  to  fill  the  bottom  of 
the  pot  inside,  and  make  an  opening  in  the  middle  of  them 
through  which  one  might  pour  in,  and  upon  these  place  two 
other  pieces  of  wood  of  the  same  size,  and  around  place  a 
kind  of  stakes,  from  the  same  wood,  protruding  from  these 
blocks  above  the  mouth  of  the  furnace.  This  being  done, 
you  will  weigh  all  the  brass-work  which  you  have,  or  four 
parts  may  be  of  copper  and  a  fifth  of  tin,  and  you  appoint  to 
each  pot  its  proportions,  according  to  its  capacity.  Then 
going  to  the  mould  furnace,  raise  the  covering  above  and  see 
how  it  may  act.  If  it  should  quite  glow  inside,  run  back  to 
the  pots,  and,  first  of  all,  put  in  some  large  coals.    Then  lay 


362 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


pone  cuprum  ordinatim  absque  sta^no,  atque  intermisce  car- 
bones  ad  jiciens  abundanter  superius,  interjectisque  ignitis  car- 
bonibus  fac  ut  folles  incipiant  flare,  primo  mediocriter,  deinde 
magis  ac  magis.  Cumque  videris  flammam  viridem  ascendere, 
jam  incipit  cuprum  liquescere,  moxque  super  ponens  carbones 
abundanter,  recurre  ad  fornacem  formse,  et  a  superior!  incipe 
longis  forcipibus  lapides  evellere  et  foras  projicere.  Hoc 
opus  in  hoc  loco  non  quaerit  pigros  operarios,  sed  agiles  atque 
studiosos,  ne  cujusquam  incuria,  vel  forma  frangatur,  vel  quis 
alium  impediat  aut  Isedat,  sive  ad  iracundiam  provocet,  quod 
omnino  cavendum  est.  Ejectis  vero  omnino  lapidibus  et  igne 
denu6  certatim  reponatur  terra,  ut  fossa  omnis  circa  formam 
diligenter  repleatur,  et  sint  qui  semper  circumeant  cum  lignis 
obtusis,  mediocriter  impingendo  et  pedibus  fortiter  calcando, 
ut  terra  quse  inponitur  formam  premat,  ne  cum  pondus  seris 
infunditur  ullomodo  frangi  possit. 


Repleta  igitur  hoc  modo  fossa  usque  ad  summum,  recurre  ad 
cacabos,  et  hgno  longo  et  torrido  commove  cuprum,  et  si  sense- 
ris  omnino  hquefactum  inpone  stagnum,  rursumque  commove 
diHgenter  ut  bene  commisceatur,  fractaque  fornace  in  circuitu 
induce  duo  ligna  fortia  et  longa  in  aures  cacabi,  adhibitisque 
viris  strenuis  et  in  hac  arte  peritis,  fac  eum  levari  cum  omni  dili- 
gentia  etad  formam  deferri,  ejectisque  carbonibus  et  favillis  at- 
que imposito  collatorio  panno  fac  morose  infundi.  Interim  cuba 
juxta  OS  formse  auditu  diligenter  considerans  qualiter  eo  intro 
procedat ;  et  si  senseris  quasi  leve  murmur  tonitru,  die  ut  mo- 
dice  teneant,  rursumque  infundant ;  sicque  interdum  tenendo 
et  iterum  infundendo  fiat  ut  ges  sequaliter  resideat,  donee 
evacuetur  cacabus  ille.  Quo  amoto,  mox  alter  delatus  in 
eodem  loco  statuatur,  fiat  de  eo  sicut  ex  priori,  et  pari  modo 
de  tertio  donee  aes  in  infusorio  videatur.    Nec  statim  cacabus 


TRANSLATION. 


363 


in  the  copper,  in  order  without  the  tin,  and  intermingle  coals, 
casting  them  abundantly  above  it,  and  ignited  coals  being 
cast  in,  cause  the  bellows  to  commence  blowing,  at  first 
moderately,  then  more  and  more.  And  when  you  see  a  green 
flame  ascend,  now  the  copper  begins  to  melt,  and  immedi- 
ately superposing  coals  plentifully,  run  back  to  the  mould 
furnace,  and  with  the  long  tongs  begin  to  pluck  out  the 
stones,  and  to  throw  them  away.  This  work  does  not  de- 
mand in  this  place  slothful,  but  agile  and  dihgent  workmen, 
lest  through  neglect  of  any  kind  either  the  mould  be  broken, 
or  one  may  hinder  or  hurt  the  other,  or  provoke  him  to  anger, 
which  is  above  all  to  be  guarded  against.  The  stones  and  fire 
being  ejected,  the  earth  must  be  again  hastily  replaced,  that 
the  hollow  about  the  mould  may  be  again  carefully  filled  up ; 
and  there  may  be  those  who  are  always  passing  round  with 
blunted  pieces  of  wood,  beating  moderately  and  tramphng 
firmly  with  the  feet,  that  the  earth  which  is  placed  in  may 
press  upon  the  mould,  lest  when  the  weight  of  the  brass  is 
poured  in,  it  in  any  way  be  broken.  The  hollow  being  then 
m  this  manner  filled  up  to  the  top,  return  quickly  to  the  pots, 
and  with  a  long  and  charred  piece  of  wood  stir  the  copper,  and 
if  you  should  feel  that  it  be  quite  melted,  put  in  the  tin,  and 
again  stir  it  carefully  that  it  may  be  well  mixed,  and,  the  fur- 
nace being  broken  around,  introduce  two  strong  and  long  poles 
into  the  handles  of  the  pot,  and  active  men  being  called,  skilful 
in  this  art,  cause  it  to  be  raised  with  every  care  and  carried  to 
the  mould,  and  the  coals  and  ashes  being  thrown  out  and  the 
strainer  cloth  put  on,  cause  it  to  be  poured  in  hardily.  In  the 
mean  time  lie  down,  near  the  mouth  of  the  mould,  carefully 
remarking,  by  listening,  how  far  within  it  may  proceed ;  and 
should  you  perceive  as  if  a  slight  murmur  of  thunder,  de- 
sire that  they  hold  a  little,  and  then  again  that  they 
pour  in;  and  so  that  sometimes  by  holding  and  again  by 
pouring,  the  brass  be  made  to  subside  evenly,  until  that 
pot  be  empty.  Which  being  removed,  another  brought  into 
the  same  place  must  be  set  up  directly,  the  same  is  done  with 
this  as  with  the  former,  and  in  like  manner  with  a  third  until 
the  brass  is  seen  in  the  funnel.    Nor  may  the  pot  be  imme- 


364 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


365 


diately  removed,  but  kept  for  a  space,  that,  should  the  brass 
sink,  it  may  again  be  poured  over.  But  should  you  wish 
to  withdraw  from  this  fatigue  of  carrying  and  founding  in 
parts,  procure  for  yourself  a  very  large  pot,  which  must  be 
flat  at  the  bottom,  and  make  an  opening  in  it  on  the  side  at 
the  bottom,  and  cover  it  with  clay  inside  and  without,  as 
above.  This  being  done,  station  it  near  the  mould,  not 
farther  than  a  distance  of  five  feet,  and  fasten  it  round  with 
stakes,  and  lay  in  fire  with  coals.  And  when  it  has  become 
glowing  close  the  opening,  which  will  be  towards  the  mould, 
with  clay,  and  arrange  upon  it  four  pieces  of  wood,  and  make 
the  small  stakes  inside  the  furnace,  as  above.  Then,  the 
copper  being  placed  in  with  coals  and  fire,  and  three  ranges 
of  bellows  being  applied,  cause  them  to  be  manfully  blown. 
In  the  mean  time  you  have  a  dry  piece  of  wood  of  such  length 
that  it  can  reach  from  the  opening  in  the  pot  to  the  mouth  of 
the  mould,  the  bend  of  this  mxust  be  ample.  When  you  shall 
have  covered  this  everywhere  with  clay  and  especially  above, 
inter  it  that  it  may  be  even  with  the  ground,  but  rather  higher 
near  the  pot,  and  heap  ignited  coals  upon  it.  The  tin  being- 
placed  in  and  stirred  with  the  copper,  as  above  with  the 
curved  iron  which  is  strongly  fixed  upon  wood,  open  the  hole, 
and  with  the  assistants,  who  can  hold  two  straining  cloths,  al- 
low them  to  flow  out ;  sometimes  withholding,  however,  as 
above.  And  when  the  mould  has  become  full  should  any 
brass  remain  in  the  pot,  place  a  mass  of  clay  upon  the  end  of 
a  stout  stick  and  press  strongly  in  front  of  the  opening  that 
you  may  close  it.  In  both  these  manners  also  smaller  bells 
can  be  founded,  according  to  the  quantity  the  pots  can  make. 
When  the  brass  shall  have  become  hard  in  the  funnel,  cause 
the  earth  to  be  hastily  cast  out  of  the  hollow  and  the  ground 
outside  to  become  somewhat  cold.  The  earth  being  thrown 
out,  this  mould  must  be  inclined  on  one  side  and  be  laid  upon 
the  ground,  and  this  is  done  until,  in  the  same  manner  as  it 
was  placed  in,  it  is  taken  out  of  the  hollow.  This  being  ac- 
complished, it  is  laid  down  entirely  upon  one  side,  and  with 
hatchets  and  other  sharp  instruments  which  are  fixed  upon 
long  pieces  of  wood,  the  inside  clay  is  hastily  cast  out,  be- 


366 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


refrigerari,  ab  humore  terrse  inflaretiir  et  campana  absque, 
dubio  finderetur.  Qua  ejecta,  ipsa  forma  iterum  erigatur 
super  terram,  sicque  stet,  donee  exterius  omnino  refrigeretur ; 
sicque  frangatur  argilla  et  circuli  ejiciantur,  et  quicquid  in- 
sequale  exterius  fuerit,  malleis  acutis  incidatur.  Deinde  in 
medio  campanag  ponatur  lignum,  huie  simile  in  quo  primum 
forma  tornata  est,  et  quatuor  aliis  lignis  in  modum  crucis  ob- 
firmetur  ora  ejus,  ita  ut  infusorium  jaceat  super  unum  asse- 
rem,  et  illud  lignum  super  alterum,  ut  inposito  curvo  ligno, 
possit  campana  tornari,  atque  cum  sabuleo  lapide  per  omnia 
sequari.  Post  heec,  infusorium  ex  utraque  parte  limatum, 
diligenter  frangatur,  et  circa  collum  duo  ligna  conjungantur, 
inferius  per  medium  minus,  et  superius  in  circuitu  majus ; 
quae  ligna  duobus  circulis  fortiter  constringantur,  atque 
ferreis  vinculis  ex  orani  parte  circa  aures  colligantur.  Illud 
vero  majus  lignum  sit  modice  longius  quam  campana  sit  lata, 
sit  que  in  summitatibus  aliquantum  gracilius  quam  in  medio, 
et  in  ipsis  summitatibus  habeat  duos  ferros  grossos  et  ro- 
tundos,  quorum  longitudo  sit  intra  lignum  spacii  dimidii  pedis 
et  extra  unius  palmi.  Cumque  aptaveris  duas  trabes  ad  sus- 
cipiendam  campanam,  fac  in  eis  duas  mensuras  duobus  digitis 
profundas,  in  quibus  clavi  illi  magni  involvantur,  sub  quibus 
etiam  pones  duos  ferros  curvos,  ad  servandas  trabes.  Habeat 
etiam  illud  grossius  lignum  in  quo  pendet  campana  in  utraque 
parte  singula  foramina,  in  quibus  ponantur  duo  ligna  sursum 
respicientia,  quibus  funes  innectantur  ad  pulsandum.  Corium 
etiam  spissum,  de  collo  cervi  circumponatur  ferro  illi  curvo, 
quod  interius  liseret  in  medio  campanse,  in  quo  batillus  pen- 
deat ;  qui  sit  tantse  longitudinis  ut  promineat  extra  campanam 
spatio  latitudinis  manus,  sitque  grossior  in  fine  longitudine 
unius  palmse,  sursumque  gracilior. 


TRANSLATION. 


367 


cause,  should  it  be  permitted  to  become  cold  in  it,  it  would 
be  swelled  out  from  the  damp  of  the  earth,  and,  without 
doubt  the  bell  would  be  cracked.  This  being  taken  out,  the 
mould  must  again  be  raised  upon  the  ground  and  may  so  re- 
main, until  the  outside  has  become  quite  cold ;  and  so  the 
clay  may  be  broken  and  the  hoops  taken  away,  and  what- 
ever inequality  should  be  outside,  may  be  cut  off  with  sharp 
hammers.  Then,  in  the  middle  of  the  bell  a  block  is  placed, 
similar  to  that  in  which  the  mould  was  first  turned,  and  four 
other  pieces  of  wood  are  fastened  firmly  to  its  edge,  so  that 
the  funnel  may  lie  upon  one  post  and  this  wood  upon  another, 
that,  a  curved  wood  being  placed  on,  the  bell  can  be  turned, 
and  with  a  sandstone  be  made  smooth  everywhere.  After- 
wards, the  funnel,  filed  on  every  side,  is  carefully  broken,  and 
about  the  neck  two  pieces  of  wood  are  joined  together,  the 
lower,  smaller  one,  through  the  middle,  and  the  upper,  larger, 
around  it ;  which  pieces  of  wood  must  be  bound  fast  by  two 
hoops,  strongly,  and  are  tied  by  iron  chains  about  the 
handles  everywhere.  This  larger  wood  should  be  rather 
longer  than  the  bell  is  wide,  and  be  somewhat  thinner  at  the 
ends  than  in  the  middle,  and  at  these  ends  it  must  have  two  thick 
and  round  irons,  the  length  of  which,  within  the  wood,  may 
be  a  space  of  half  a  foot,  and  beyond  it,  of  one  palm.  And 
when  you  have  fitted  two  beams  for  sustaining  the  bell,  make 
two  measures  in  them  two  fingers  deep,  in  which  these  large 
nails  can  be  enclosed,  under  which  you  also  place  two  curved 
irons  for  preserving  the  beams.  That  larger  wood  in  which 
the  bell  hangs  must  also  have,  on  each  side,  single  holes,  in 
which  two  woods  projecting  upwards  are  placed;  to  these  the 
ropes  are  tied  for  tolling.  A  thick  leather  also,  of  the  stag's 
neck  may  be  placed  round  that  curved  iron,  which  rests  in- 
side in  the  middle  of  the  bell,  in  which  the  tongue  must 
hang,  which  must  be  of  such  length  that  it  may  protrude  be- 
yond the  bell  for  a  space  of  the  width  of  the  hand,  and  let  it 
be  thicker  at  the  end  for  the  length  of  a  palm,  and  thinner 
upwards. 


368 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  LXXXVI. 

DE  MENSURA  CYMBALORUM. 

QUICUNQUE  vult  facere  cymbala  ad  cantandum  recte 
sonantia,  ad  unumquodque  debet  ceram  dividere  cum 
pondere,  et  a  snperioribus  incipiat  ut  descendendo  possit 
pervenire  ad  graviora.  Unumquodque  autem  notet  cum  pro- 
pria littera  ut  illud  in  divisione  cognoscat.  Inprimis  faciat 
duas  partes  cerse  sequales  cum  libra,  unam  ad  a  litteram, 
alteram  ad  g.  Ceram  a  litterae  dividat  in  octo  aequales  partes, 
et  tantum  ad  ceram  g  litterse  quantum  est  in  octava  parte 
cerae  a.  Similiter  dividat  ceram  g  per  octo  et  tantum  det  f 
litterse  quantum  est  in  summa  ejus,  et  insuper  octavam  ejus 
partem,  et  habebit  duos  tonos  continuos.  In  illo  loco  semi- 
tonium^  debet  esse,  et  hoc  ita  inveniat.  Summam  cerae  a 
litterae  dividat  in  tres  partes,  ipsamque  summam  det  e  litterae, 
et  insuper  ejus  terciam  partem.  Deinde  det  tantum  cerae  d 
litterae,  quantum  est  in  summa  a  et  octavam  ejus  partem. 
Item  tantum  cerae  det  litterae  c  quantum  habet  g,  et  mediam 
ejus  partem,  itaque  haberet  duos  tonos  post  semitonium. 
Deinde  tantum  cerae  tribuat  b  litterae  quantum  est  in  tota 
summa  f  litterae,  et  insuper  terciam  ejus  partem,  et  habebit 
iterum  semitonium ;  atque  septem  symphonias  ab  a  littera 
usque  ad  b  inveniat.  Dyapason  vero  necdum  haberet  sine 
octavo  cymbalo.  Duplicet  igitur  totam  ceram  a  litterae  et  sic 
eam  tribuat  a  litterae,  et  nichil  deerit.  Dyatesseron,  Dyapason, 
atque  Dyapente  Synemenon  autem  inveniat  ita,  tollat  sum- 
mam cerae  litterae  et  tantum  det  f  litterae,  et  insuper  medie- 
tatem  ejus,  ac  constituat  illam  inter  a  et  b.  Omnino  autem 
caveat  qui  cymbala  formare  aut  fundere  debet,  ut  de  supra- 
dicta  cera  quae  tarn  caute  ponderata  et  divisa  est,  nichil  mittat 
ad  juga  et  spiramina,  sed  de  altera  cera  faciat  ilia  omnia. 

'  "  semitonus,"  imo. 


TRANSLATION. 


369 


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. 

OF  THE   MEASURE  OF  CYMBALS. 

Whoever  wishes  to  make  cymbals  of  proper  sound  for  sing- 
ing, should  divide  the  wax  for  each  one  with  a  weight,  and 
should  begin  from  the  highest,  that  by  descending  he  may  be 
able  to  arrive  at  the  graver  (cymbals).    He  can  likewise  note 
each  one  with  its  own  letter,  that  he  may  know  it  in  the  par- 
tition.   In  the  first  place  let  him  make  two  portions  of  wax 
equal  with  the  balance,  one  for  letter  a,  the  other  for  g.  Let 
him  divide  the  wax  of  letter  a  into  eight  equal  parts,  and 
(give)  so  much  to  the  wax  of  letter  g  as  is  in  the  eighth  part 
of  wax  a  :  let  him  similarly  divide  wax  g  by  eight,  and  give 
so  much  to  letter  f  as  is  in  its  total,  and  an  eighth  of  its  part 
beyond,  and  he  will  have  two  consecutive  notes.    In  that 
place  the  semitone  should  be,  and  let  him  thus  find  it.  Let 
him  divide  the  whole  of  the  wax  of  letter  a  into  three  parts, 
and  give  this  total  to  letter  e  and  beyond,  the  third  part  of  it. 
Then  let  him  give  so  much  wax  to  letter  d  as  is  in  the  total 
and  the  eighth  part  of  it.    Likewise  let  him  give  as  much 
wax  to  letter  c  as  g  possesses  and  half  a  part  of  it,  and  he  will 
thus  have  two  notes  after  the  semitone.    Then  let  him  afford 
to  letter  b  so  much  wax  as  is  in  the  whole  amount  of  letter  f 
and  beyond,  the  third  part  of  it,  and  he  will  have  the  semi- 
tone again ;  and  let  him  find  the  seven  concords  from  letter 
a  to  B.    The  octave  he  cannot  yet  have  without  the  eighth 
cymbal.    Let  him  therefore  double  all  the  wax  of  letter 
and  so  give  it  to  letter  a,  and  nothing  will  be  wanting :  the 
fourth,  eighth  and  fifth  chord  let  him  find  thus,  let  him  take 
the  amount  of  the  wax  of  the  letter  and  give  so  much  to 
letter  f  and  the  half  of  it  beyond,  and  let  him  establish  it 
between  a  and  b.    He  who  should  fashion  or  found  the 
cymbals  should  above  all  take  care,  that  he  puts  none  of 
the  above  mentioned  wax,  which  is  so  cautiously  weighed 
and  divided,  to  the  necks  and  air-holes,  but  let  him  make 
all  these  from  other  wax.    Let  him  have  the  great  fore- 

B  B 


370 


THEOPHILT   LIBER  III. 


In  magna  providentia  habeat  ut,  priusquam  aliquid  cymba- 
lum  fundatur,  stagnum  cum  cupro  misceatur,  ut  rectum  so- 
num  habeat.  Quod  si  aliter  fecerit  non  veniunt  ad  tonos. 
Quinta  aut  sexta  pars  debet  esse  stagnum,  utrumque  bene 
purificatum  priusquam  permisceatur  ut  clare  sonent.  Si 
autem  fusa  cymbala  minus  recte  sonuerint,  hoc  emendetur 
lima  vel  lapide. 


CAPUT  LXXXVL 

DE  CYMBALIS  MUSICIS. 

FACTURUS  cymbala,  primum  aquire  tibi  lectionem  et 
secundum  quod  docuerit  formam  facito,  atque  ceram  di- 
ligenter  pondera.  Quas^  cum  fuderis,  sicut  supra  dictum  est, 
si  quid  per  negligentiam  vel  incuriam  de  equitate  tonorum  de- 
fuerit,  corriges.  Si  volueris  cymbalum  altius  habere,  in  ora 
inferius  limabis,  si  vero  humilius,  circa  oram  in  circuitu. 


CAPUT  LXXXVIL 

DE  AMPULLIS  STAGNEIS. 

FAC  tibi  duos  ferros  longitudine  manus  et  modice  gracili- 
ores  minimo  digito,  qui  sunt  in  una  parte  grossiores,  in 
altera  summitate  deductim  graciliores,  ut  possint  ex  forma  de- 
duci ;  habeantque  in  grossiori  parte  caudas  tenues,  ut  singuHs 
manubriis  confingantur,  quae  manubria  sint  rotunda;  et  ha- 
beant  in  altera  summitate  breves  clavos  rotundos,  in  quibus 
tornari  possint.  His  ferris  circumpone  argillam,  primo  parum, 
deinde  amplius  secundum  magnitudinem  quam  volueris.  Qua 
siccata  fac  tornatorium  tuum  eodem  modo  quo  tornantur  scu- 

'  qua  ? 


TRANSLATION. 


371 


sight  that  before  any  cymbal  be  cast,  the  tin  be  mixed  with 
the  copper  that  it  may  have  the  right  sound.  Because 
should  he  have  done  otherwise,  they  are  not  brought  to  their 
tones.  A  fifth  or  sixth  part  should  be  tin,  and  be  both  well 
purified  before  they  are  mixed  together,  that  they  may  sound 
clearly.  Should,  however,  the  cast  cymbals  sound  imper- 
fectly, this  can  be  rectified  with  the  file,  or  stone. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. 

OF  MUSICAL  CYMBALS. 

Being  about  to  make  cymbals  first  procure  your  directions, 
and  according  to  what  they  may  have  taught,  make  the  mould, 
and  carefully  weigh  the  wax.  When  you  have  founded  these  as 
mentioned  above,  should  anything  be  wanting  in  justness  of 
tone  through  neghgence  or  carelessness,  you  correct  it. 
Should  you  wish  the  cymbal  to  be  higher,  you  will  file  about 
the  mouth  underneath  (of  the  mould),  but  if  flatter,  round  the 
rim  in  circumference. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVII. 

OF  TIN  VIALS. 

Make  two  irons  for  yourself  the  length  of  the  hand  and  rather 
thinner  than  the  little  finger,  which  are  thicker  at  one  end, 
at  the  other  extremity  graduated  more  thinly,  that  they  can 
be  drawn  out  from  the  mould;  and  let  them  have  at  the 
thicker  part  thin  projections  that  they  may  each  be  forged 
with  handles,  which  handles  must  be  round ;  and  they  must 
have,  at  the  other  end,  short  round  nails  by  which  they  can 
be  turned.  Place  clay  round  these  irons,  httle  at  first,  then 
more,  according  to  the  size  you  wish.  This  being  dry,  make 
your  lathe  in  the  same  manner  as  trenchers  and  other  wooden 

B  B  2 


372 




--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


373 


vessels  are  turned,  so  that  one  column  may  stand  firmly,  and 
the  other  can  be  moved,  which,  however,  when  it  has  been 
adapted,  shall  be  fastened  below  with  a  thin  nail.  Adjust 
the  mould  between  the  columns  and  both  the  nails  in  their 
openings,  and  the  strap  being  placed  round  the  wood,  and  the 
boy  who  draws  it  being  seated,  you  will  turn  it  as  you  please, 
and  overlay  the  wax.  This  being  similarly  turned,  withdraw 
the  mould  from  the  handle  with  the  iron,  and  the  air-holes 
being  placed  on,  and  clay  overlaid  and  dry,  cast  out  the  wax 
and  place  it  in  the  furnace  to  recook,  in  the  above  mentioned 
manner.  And  when  it  has  quite  glowed  inside,  take  it  out  of 
the  fire,  and  so  allow  it  to  remain  until  it  has  become  cold,  so 
that  it  can  be  held  in  the  hand  awhile.  And  tin  being  in- 
stantly melted  in  an  iron  basin,  or  pot,  a  little  quicksilver  is 
added  to  it  when  it  has  become  time  for  founding,  so  that,  if 
there  is  a  pound  of  tin,  a  fourth  part  must  be  (added)  of 
quicksilver;  and  it  must  be  poured  into  the  mould  without 
delay.  When  this  has  become  quite  cold  the  clay  may  be 
broken  outside,  and  the  handle  being  replaced,  it  must  be 
again  placed  in  the  lathe  and  be  turned  smoothly  everywhere, 
but  at  last  it  is  pohshed  with  the  rough  grass.  After  this, 
take  a  little  of  the  same  scrapings  of  tin  and  mix  with  it  a 
little  quicksilver,  and  you  will  rub  it  with  your  fingers  until 
it  becomes  quite  liquid;  and  thus  with  a  small  cloth  you 
anoint  it,  about  the  jar,  by  turning,  until  it  remains  dry  and 
fair;  the  iron  being  taken  out  and  the  inner  clay,  also,  vou 
dig  a  small  hollow  in  the  middle  of  the  tin,  about  the  opening 
below,  in  which  the  iron  was,  and  you  join  in  it  a  small  piece 
of  the  same  tin,  a  little  thicker  than  is  the  vial,  and  inside,  you 
place  a  round  piece  of  wood,  upon  which  it  may  lean  so  that  it 
may  not  be  bent,  and  strike  it  outside  with  a  moderate  sized 
hammer  until  it  is  brought  into  these  hollows  and  can  stand 
firmly.  You  can  also  otherwise  close  this  opening.  Place 
the  wood  into  the  vial  as  above,  the  end  of  this  you  wrap 
in  a  small  cloth ;  you  pour  pure  melted  lead  into  the  opening, 
wax  being  also  scraped  on  the  same  place,  and  you  will  thus 
quickly  smooth  it  with  the  small  hammer. 


374 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  LXXXVIII. 

QUALITER  STAGNUM  SOLIDETUR. 

PERCUTE  in  stagno  quasi  duos  cyphos  sequales,  et  con- 
junge  illos  in  medio,  ita  ut  ora  unius  in  altera  procedat, 
inpositoque  illo  qui  continet  cineribus  calidis,  partem  ejusdem 
stagni,  plumbi  tercia  parte  admixta,  percute  tenuissime,  et 
intercidens  particulatim  circumpone ;  adhibitisque  modicis 
carbonibus  ignitis,  mox  ut  incaluerit  circumunge  resinam 
abietis,  et  mox  ipsas  particulas  liquescere  ac  circumfluere 
videbis.  Mox  carbonibus  amotis,  refrigeratum  firmum  erit. 
Hoc  modo  solidari  potest  quicquid  in  puro  stagno  est  opus, 
videlicet,  efFusoria  in  ampullis  et  auriculae,  atque  ligaturse  in 
qui  bus  opercula  pendent,  et  si  aliquid  foramen  in  fusili  ampulla 
per  negligentiam  contigerit. 


CAPUT  LXXXIX. 

DE  FUNDENDO  EFFUSORIO. 

POTEST  etiam  efFusorium  facile  ita  formari,  ut  incidatur 
fissile  lignum  rotundum,  et  foretur  terebro  in  longitu- 
dine,  non  usque  ad  finem,  et  findatur  per  medium,  atque  in 
integro  illo  formetur  foramen,  cui  ferrum  rotundum  secundum 
interiorem  amplitudinem  infusorii,  tenui  argilla  illitum  injun- 
gatur,  et  foris  valide  circumligetur,  stagnumque,  illi  calefacto, 
infundatur.  Quo  refrigerato  lignum  solvatur,  et  ferrum  ejici- 
atur,  efFusoriumque  limatum  et  planatum,  modo  quo  superius 
dictum  est,  vasi  consolidetur. 


TRANSLATION. 


375 


CHAPTER  LXXXVIII. 

^  HOW  TIN   IS  SOLDERED. 

Beat,  from  tin  two  cups,  alike,  and  join  them  together  in  the 
middle,  so  that  the  rira  of  one  may  pass  into  the  other,  and 
that  which  contains  the  other  being  placed  upon  hot  ashes, 
beat  very  thinly  a  piece  of  the  same  tin  mixed  with  a  third 
part  of  lead,  and  cutting  it  up  very  small,  lay  it  around  (the 
join) ;  and  a  few  ignited  coals  being  applied,  as  soon  as  it  has 
glowed,  anoint  it  round  with  resin  of  the  fir-tree,  and  you 
will  instantly  see  these  particles  melt  and  flow  about.  The 
coals  being  directly  removed,  when  cold,  it  will  be  firm.  In 
this  manner,  whatever  work  is  in  pure  tin  may  be  soldered, 
namely,  the  spouts  and  handles  in  vials,  and  the  fastenings  in 
which  the  covers  hang,  also  should  any  hole  have  happened 
through  negligence  in  the  cast  vial. 


CHAPTER  LXXXIX. 

OP  casting  the  spout. 

The  spout  can  also  thus  be  easily  formed ;  a  piece  of  cleft  wood 
is  cut  round,  and  is  bored  with  the  auger  lengthwise,  not  quite 
to  the  end,  and  it  is  spht  through  the  middle;  and  in  its  whole 
part  a  hole  is  made  to  which  a  circular  iron,  according  to  the 
capacity  of  the  interior  of  the  spout,  overlaid  with  thin  clay, 
is  inserted,  and  it  is  well  bound  round  outside,  and  tin,  it 
being  made  warm,  is  poured  in.  Which  being  cold,  the  wood 
is  loosened,  and  the  iron  taken  out,  and  the  spout  being  filed 
and  smoothed  in  the  above  mentioned  manner,  is  fastened  on 
to  the  vase. 


376 


THEOPHTLI    LIBER  III- 


CAPUT  XC. 

DE  FERRO. 

FERRUM  nascitur  in  terra  in  modum  lapidum,  quod,  ef- 
fossum  eodem  modo  quo  cuprum  superius  frangitur  et 
in  massas  confunditur,  deinde  in  fornace  ferrarii  liquatur,  et 
percutitur  ut  aptum  fiat  unicuique  operi.  Calibs  dicitur  a 
monte  Calibe,  in  quo  ejus  usus  plurimus  invenitur;  qui  simili 
modo  preparatur  ut  operi  aptus  fiat.  Cum  eroo  ferrum  prse- 
paraveris  et  inde  calcaria,  sive  caetera  equestria  utensilia 
feceris,  et  ea  auro  vel  argento  decorare  volueris,  sume  ar- 
gentum  purissimum,  et  percutiendo  valde  attenua.  Deinde 
habeas  rotulam  ligneam  de  quercu,  longitudine  pedis  latam  et 
tornatam,  quae  sit  in  circuitu  tenuis  et  in  medio  ex  utraque 
parte  spissam,  ubi  ei  aliud  lignum  curvum  transfigatur  in  quo 
possit  volvi,  cui  etiam  in  una  summitate  aliud  lignum  curvum 
apponatur  cum  quo  circumrotetur.  Cumque  ipsam  rotam 
aptaveris  inter  duas  columpnellas,  fac  circa  oram  ejus  ex- 
terius  incisuras  in  modum  gradus,  quae  retro  respiciunt,  ut 
ipsse  columpnellse  in  quibus  rota  vergitur,  firmiter  sint 
fixae  super  scamnum  in  latitudine,  ita  ut  curvum  lignum 
ad  dexteram  manus  sit.  Stet  quoque  adhuc  una  colump- 
nella  ad  sinistram  manum  in  anteriori  parte  juxta  rotam, 
in  qua  sit  fixum  gracile  lignum,  ita  ut  super  rotam  jaceat 
et  habeat  in  summitate  sua  particulam  calibis,  longitudine 
et  latitudine  majoris  unguis,  firmiter  per  foramen  infixam, 
et  valde  acutam,  ita  ut  cum  rota  volvitur  illud  lignum 
semper  cadat  ab  uno  gradu  in  alteram,  ut  sic  vibratus  calibs 
quicquid  adponitur  incidat.  Cum  vero  limaveris  calcar 
unum  aequaliter,  pone  illud  super  carbones  ardentes  donee  ni- 
grescat,  refrigeratumque  tene  manii  sinistra  et  rotam  volve 
dextra,  appositumque  calibi,  incide  subtiliter  per  omnia  ex- 


TRANSLATION. 


377 


CHAPTER  XC. 

OF  IRON. 

Iron  is  formed  in  the  earth,  in  form  of  stones,  which  (iron) 
is  dug  up  in  the  same  manner  as  the  copper,  above  mentioned, 
and  it  is  broken,  and  is  mixed  together  in  lumps,  it  is  then 
melted  in  the  iron  worker's  furnace,  and  it  is  hammered  that 
it  may  become  fit  for  any  kind  of  work.  It  is  called  Calibs, 
from  the  mount  Calybe,  in  which  the  most  is  known  of  its 
practice ;  wherefore  it  is  prepared  in  the  same  manner  that  it 
may  become  fit  for  work.  When,  therefore,  you  shall  have 
prepared  the  iron,  and  have  made  bits  from  it,  or  other  eques- 
trian utensils,  and  wish  to  decorate  them  with  gold  or  silver, 
take  the  purest  silver,  and  thin  it  much  by  hammering. 
Then  you  have  a  wooden  wheel,  of  oak,  a  foot  in  dia- 
meter and  turned,  which  must  be  narrow  at  the  outer  part, 
and  everywhere  thick  in  the  middle,  where  another  circular 
wood  is  fixed  on  to  it,  in  which  it  can  be  revolved,  to  which 
also,  at  one  end,  another  circular  wood  may  be  placed,  with 
which  it  can  be  turned  round.  And  when  you  have  adapted 
this  wheel  between  two  small  columns,  make  about  its  outer 
edge  small  cuttings  like  steps,  which  incline  backwards  ;  these 
columns,  in  which  the  wheel  is  displayed,  must  be  firmly 
fixed  upon  a  bench  lengthwise,  so  that  the  round  wood  may 
be  on  the  right  hand.  There  may  also  stand  yet  another 
column  at  the  left  hand,  in  front,  near  the  wheel,  in  which  a 
thin  wood  must  be  fixed,  so  that  it  may  lie  upon  the  wheel 
and  have  at  its  extremity  a  small  piece  of  steel,  of  the  length 
and  breadth  of  the  smallest  finger  nail,  firmly  fixed  through 
an  opening,  and  extremely  sharp,  so  that  when  the  wheel  is 
revolved,  this  wood  may  always  fall  from  one  step  to  another, 
that  being  so  vibrated,  the  steel  may  cut  into  whatsoever  is 
applied.  When  you  have  filed  a  spur  smoothly,  place  it  over 
the  glowing  coals  until  it  has  become  black,  and  hold  it, 
having  become  cold,  in  the  left  hand,  and  revolve  the  wheel 
with  the  right,  and  applying  it  to  the  steel,  cut  finely  over  the 


378 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


terius  in  longitudine,  et  rursum  dupliciter  in  latitudine.  Quo 
facto,  cum  parvulo  foFcipe  frica  particulas  argenti  sicut  vo- 
lueris  et  superpone,  atque  cum  eodem  forcipe  frica  sum- 
mitates  argenti  ut  adhereant.  Cumque  totum  operaveris, 
denuo  pone  super  prunas  ardentes  donee  rursum  nigrum 
fiat,  atque  elevans  forcipe,  cum  longo  ferro  ex  calibe  valde 
asquali  et  manubrio  infixo  diligenter  polies,  suppositumque 
prunis,  iterum  calefaties  rursumque  cum  eodem  ferro  fortiter 
polies.  Quod  si  volueris  illud  per  partes  aut  ex  toto  deau- 
rare,  in  tua  sit  potestate.  Hoc  modo  frsena  et  cetera  instru- 
menta  equestria  vel  quodcunque  in  ferro  volueris  incide  modo 
quo  superius,  sed  profundius,  habeasque  fila  ex  argento  sub- 
tilissima  atque  ex  auro,  formaris  tibi  inde  brevissimos  floscu- 
los  et  circulos,  sive  aliud  quodcunque  libuerit,  et  cum  gracili 
forcipe  super  ferrum  qualiter  volueris  pone,  atque  cum  brevi 
malleo  leniter  percute  ut  adhaereat ;  sitque  semper  unus  flos- 
culus  aureus  alter  argenteus.  Impleto  autem  taliter  spacio 
ferri  totius,  pone  super  prunas  donee  nigrescat,  atque  cum 
mediocri  malleo  percute  diligenter,  donee  ubicunque  ferrum 
apparet  incisurse  illee  sequales  fiant,  et  sic  opus  illud  videatur 
quasi  nigellum  sit.  Si  vero  in  cultellis  sive  in  aliis  ferris  lit- 
teras  habere  volueris,  cum  fossorio  ferro  fode  eas  inprimis, 
deinde  facto  filo  argenteo  grosso,  forma  cum  gracili  forcipe 
litteras,  et  inpone  eas  fossuris  illis,  percutiensque  superius 
cum  malleo  imple  eas.  Hoc  modo  etiam  flosculos  et  circulos 
facere  potes  in  ferro,  et  cum  filis  ex  cupro  et  auricalco  imple. 
Si  quid  vero  hujus  operis  vetustate  seu  negligentia  fractum 
fuerit,  si  argentum  quod  est  volueris  acquirere,  mitte  illud 
in  ignem  donee  candeat,  tenensque  sinistra  manu  cum  for- 
cipe, dextera  longum  plumbum  frica  super  omnia  loca  ubi 
argentum  apparet,  et  mox  liquescente  plumbo  ipsum  liquescit, 
et  ei  commiscetur;  sicque  plumbum  comburitur  et  argentum 
acquiritur. 


TRANSLATION. 


379 


whole  outside  lengthwise,  and  again  doubly  in  its  breadth. 
This  being  done,  with  the  small  pincers  rub  and  overlay  small 
pieces  of  silver  as  you  may  desire,  and  with  the  same  forceps 
rub  the  tops  of  the  silver  particles,  that  they  may  adhere. 
And  when  you  have  worked  the  whole,  place  it  anew  over 
the  glowing  coals  until  it  is  again  made  black,  and  raising  it 
with  the  pincers,  you  carefully  polish  it  with  the  long  piece  of 
steel,  fixed  in  a  handle  and  very  smooth,  and  being  placed 
over  the  coals,  you  again  warm  it  and  again  polish  it  strongly 
with  the  same  instrument.  But  should  you  wish  to  gild  it  in 
parts,  or  wholly,  it  is  in  your  power.  In  this  manner  bits 
and  other  equestrian  utensils,  or  whatsoever  you  will  in  iron, 
you  cut  in  the  above  manner,  but  more  deeply,  you  can  also 
have  very  fine  wires  of  silver  and  of  gold,  with  them  you  can 
form  for  yourself  very  small  flowers  and  circles,  or  any  other 
thing  which  it  may  please  you,  and  place  it  with  the  slender 
forceps  upon  the  iron  as  you  may  wish,  and  with  the  short 
hammer  strike  gently,  that  it  may  adhere,  and  let  there  be 
always  one  small  flower  golden,  the  other  silver.  All  the 
space,  however,  of  the  whole  iron  being  filled  up,  lay  it  over 
the  coals  until  it  grow  black,  and  beat  it  carefully  with  the 
middling  sized  hammer,  until  wherever  the  iron  appear  these 
incisions  may  become  smooth,  and  thus  the  work  may  appear 
as  if  blackened.  Should  you  wish  to  have  letters  upon  blades 
or  other  instruments,  sculp  them  first  with  the  hollowing  iron, 
then  a  thick  silver  wire  being  made,  form  the  letters  with  the 
slender  forceps  and  lay  them  in  these  hollows,  and  beating 
above  them  with  the  hammer  fill  them.  You  C9,n  also  in  this 
manner  make  flowers  and  circles  upon  the  iron,  and  fill  them 
with  wires  of  copper  and  brass.  Should,  however,  anything 
of  this  work  become  broken  through  age  or  carelessness,  if 
you  wish  to  acquire  the  silver  in  it,  place  it  in  the  fire  until  it 
glows,  and  holding  it  in  the  left  hand  with  the  forceps,  with 
the  right  rub  a  long  piece  of  lead  over  all  places  where  the 
silver  appears,  and  immediately  it  liquefies  with  the  melted 
lead  and  is  mixed  with  it ;  and  the  lead  is  thus  burned,  and 
the  silver  procured. 


380 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  XCI. 

DE  SOLIDATURA  FERRI. 

FIUNT  etiam  ex  ferro  circuli  tenues  qui  ponuntur  in  raa- 
nubriis  ferramentorum  qui  non  possunt  per  se  solidari, 
quibus  in  junctura  circumvolvitur  cuprum  tenue,  atque  cir- 
cumponitur  modicum  argillae.  Qua  siccata,  cum  ante  for- 
nacem  sub  carbonibus  sufflat  canduerit,  mox  liquefiictum 
cuprum  circumfluit  et  solidat.  Hoc  modo  etiam  claves  stag- 
nates, si  franguntur,  et  alia  quselibet  in  ferro  solidari  possunt. 
Quod  si  vis  seras  componere  quibus  manticae  serantur,  per- 
cute  ferrum  tenue  et  circa  aliud  ferrum  rotundum  complica, 
atque  conjunge  ei  fundum  superius  et  inferius.  Deinde  cir- 
cumpone  ei  corrigiolos  ex  eodem  ferro  et  inter  eos  flosculos 
sive  circulos  qualiter  volueris,  sic  tamen  ut  una  particula 
semper  inpingatur  alteri  ut  adhaereat,  ne  cadere  possit. 
Commisce  quoque  duos  partes  cupri  et  tertiam  stagni,  et 
comminue  illud  malleo  in  vasculo  ferreo  subtiliter,  combu- 
rensque  viniceum  lapidem,  adde  ei  modicum  salis  atque  com- 
misce aqua,  et  liniens  in  circuitu  circum sparge  ipsum  pul- 
verem.  Quo  siccato,  rursum  superlinies  confectionem  illam 
spissius,  inponensque  prunis  ac  diligenter  circumtegens,  sicut 
argentum  superius,  eodem  modo  solidabis;  refrigeratumque 
per  se  lavabis.  Hoc  modo  quicquid  volueris  in  ferro  solidare 
potes,  quod  tamen  nullo  modo  deauratur.  Quicquid  super 
stagnare  volueris  in  ferro,  primum  lima  et  priusquam  manu 
tangas,  noviter  limatum  in  patellam  stagni  liquefacti  cum 
adipe  projice,  et  cum  forcipe  commove,  donee  candidum  fiat, 
eductumque  fortiter  excute,  atque  cum  furfure  et  lineo  panno 
purga.  Seras  ferreas  atque  ligaturas  scriniorum  et  ostiorum 
cum  feceris,  ad  ultimum  calefacies  et  pice  linies,  clavi  vero 
stagnati  sint.  Cum  feceris  calcaria,  frenos  et  instrumenta 
sellae  humilium  clericorum  et  monachorum,  et  ea  aequaliter 


TRANSLATION. 


381 


CHAPTER  XCI. 

OF  SOLDERING  IRON. 

Thin  rings  are  also  made  from  iron,  which  are  placed  upon 
the  handles  of  iron  instrmnents,  which  cannot  be  made 
firm  by  themselves,  a  thin  piece  of  copper  is  folded  round 
these  at  the  join,  and  a  little  clay  is  placed  around  it.  This 
being  dry,  when,  being  blown  upon,  it  has  become  glowing 
under  the  coals  before  the  furnace,  the  melted  copper  in- 
stantly flows  around  and  solders  it.  In  this  manner  also 
tinned  keys,  and  any  other  things  in  iron  can  be  soldered. 
But  should  you  wish  to  make  locks  with  which  clothes  chests 
are  fastened,  beat  a  thin  piece  of  iron,  and  bend  it  round 
another  round  iron,  and  join  a  bottom  to  it  above  and  below. 
Then  place  round  it  small  hoops  of  the  same  iron,  and  be- 
tween them  small  flowers  or  circles  as  you  may  wish,  so, 
however,  that  one  small  piece  may  always  impinge  upon 
another  that  it  may  adhere  and  cannot  fall  off'.  Mix  together 
also  two  parts  of  copper  and  a  third  of  tin,  and  grind  it  with 
the  pestle  in  an  iron  vase  very  finely,  and  burning  the  wine- 
stone,  add  to  it  a  little  salt  and  mix  it  with  water,  and  anoint- 
ing it  around  sprinkle  this  powder  about  it.  Which  being 
dry,  you  again  overlay  this  mixture  more  thickly,  and  placing 
it  upon  the  embers  and  carefully  covering  it  about,  as  the 
silver  above,  you  will  solder  it  in  the  same  manner;  and, 
having  cooled  by  itself,  you  will  wash  it.  You  can  solder 
whatever  you  wish,  in  iron,  in  this  manner,  which  can, 
however,  in  no  way  be  gilt.  Whatever  you  may  wish  to  tin 
over,  in  iron,  file  it  first,  and  before  you  may  touch  it  with 
the  hand,  throw  it  newly  filed  into  a  pot  of  melted  tin  with 
grease,  and  stir  it  with  the  tongs  until  it  becomes  white,  and 
being  taken  out,  shake  it  strongly,  and  clean  it  with  bran  and 
a  linen  cloth.  When  you  have  made  iron  locks  and  bindings  of 
caskets  and  doors,  you  warm  them  lastly  and  anoint  them  with 
pitch,  but  the  nails  are  tinned.  When  you  have  made  the  stir- 
rups, bits  and  saddle  appendages  of  humble  clerks  and  monks, 
and  have  filed  them  smoothly,  warm  them  moderately  and 


382  THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 

limaveris,  calefac  mediocriter  et  frica  super  ea  cornu  bovis, 
sive  pennas  anseris,  quae  cum  a  calore  modicum  liquefacta 
ferro  adhaeserint,  nigrum  colorem  et  quod  a  modo  ei  conveni- 
entem  prsebebit. 


CAPUT  XCII. 

DE  SCULPTURA  OSSIS. 

SCULPTURUS  OS,  primum  forma  tabulam  cujus  magni- 
tudinis  volueris,  et  superponens  cretam,  pertrahe  cum 
plumbo  imagines  secundum  libitum,  atque  cum  gracili  ferro 
designa  tractus  ut  appareant ;  deinde  cum  diversis  ferris  fode 
campos  quam  profunde  volueris,  et  sic  demum  ingenium  et 
scientiam  tuam  sculpe  imagines,  vel  aliud  quod  libuerit. 
Quod  si  volueris  opus  tuum  auri  petula  ornare,  gluten  de 
vesica  piscis  qui  dicitur  huso  subpone,  et  incisa  petula  per 
particulas,  sicut  volueris  suppone.  Forma  etiam  manubria 
ex  ebore  rotunda  sive  costata,  et  fac  foramen  per  medium  in 
longitudine,  deinde  cum  limis  diversis  ad  hoc  opus  aptis  am- 
plifica  foramen  ut  sit  interius  sicut  exterius,  et  sit  per  rotum 
sequaliter  et  mediocriter  tenue;  atque  pertrahe  in  circuitu 
subtiliter  flosculos,  sive  bestias,  aves,  vel  dracones  collibus  et 
caudis  concatenatos,  et  cum  subtihbus  ferris  campos  transfora, 
deinde  sculpe  quam  gracilius  et  operosius  possis.  Quo  facto, 
imple  foramen  interius  ligno  quercineo,  quod  cooperies  cupro 
tenui  deaurato,  ita  ut  per  omnes  campos  aurum  videri  possit ; 
sicque  ex  eodem  osse  particuH  duabus  injunctis,  obstrue  fora- 
men ante  et  retro,  quas  obfirmabis  osseis  clavis,  tam  sub- 
tiliter, ut  nullus  considerare  possit  qualiter  aurum  impositum 
sit.  Post  hsec  in  anteriori  particula  fac  foramen  in  quo  cul- 
tellus  inponatur,  cujus  cauda  calefacta  leviter  potest  inponi, 
quia  lignum  est  interius  et  firmiter  stabit :  fac  etiam  manu- 


TRANSLATION. 


383 


rub  over  them  with  the  horn  of  an  ox  or  the  feather  of  a 
goose,  when  which,  a  Httle  melted  by  the  heat,  have  adhered 
to  the  iron,  it  will  show  a  black  colour  which  is  in  a  manner 
suitable  to  him. 


CHAPTER  XCIL 

OF  SCULPTURING  IVORY. 


In  sculpturing  ivory,  first  form  a  tablet  of  the  magnitude  you 
may  wish,  and  superposing  chalk,  portray  with  a  lead  the 
figures  according  to  your  pleasure,  and  with  a  pointed  instru- 
ment mark  the  lines  that  they  may  appear ;  then  carve  the 
grounds  as  deeply  as  you  wish  with  different  instruments,  and 
sculp  the  figures  or  other  thing  you  please  according  to  your 
invention  and  skill.  But  should  you  wish  to  ornament  your 
work  with  a  leaf  of  gold,  lay  on  glue  of  the  bladder  of  the 
fish  which  is  called  "  huso,"  and  the  leaf  being  cut  into  small 
pieces,  overlay  it  as  you  please.  Fashion  also  round  or  ribbed 
handles  from  ivory,  and  make  an  opening  through  the 
middle  lengthwise,  then  with  various  files  proper  for  this  work 
enlarge  the  opening  that  it  may  be  inside  as  outside,  and  let 
it  be  smooth  everywhere  and  moderately  thin;  and  portray 
flowerets  around  it  very  finely,  or  animals,  birds,  or  dragons 
twisted  together  by  the  necks  and  tails,  and  transpierce  the 
grounds  with  very  fine  instruments,  then  sculp  as  gracefully 
and  artistically  as  you  may  be  able.  Which  being  done,  fill 
the  opening  inside  with  oak  wood  which  you  cover  with  thin 
gilt  copper,  so  that  through  all  the  grounds  the  gold  can  be 
seen ;  and  so  two  pieces  being  joined -in  from  a  particle  of  the 
same  ivory,  close  the  hole  before  and  behind,  you  will  fasten 
these  on  with  ivory  pegs,  so  cunningly,  that  no  one  may  be 
able  to  see  how  the  gold  is  laid  in.  After  this  make  an  open- 
ing in  the  small  piece  in  front  in  which  the  blade  is  placed, 
the  handle  of  which,  being  heated,  can  be  easily  inserted  be- 
cause the  wood  is  within,  and  it  will  stand  fast ;  make,  also. 


384 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


brium  simplex  qualiter  volueris,  et  secundum  quantiiatem 
ejus  fac  foramen  cui  cultellus  imponi  debet,  atque  injunge  ei 
lignum  diligenter,  et  sicut  lignum  formatum  est,  ita  fac  for- 
mari  caudam  cultelli.  Deinde  tere  thus  lucidum  in  tenuis- 
simum  pulverem,  et  inde  imple  foramen  manubrij,  atque  cum 
lineo  panno  humido  involve  cultellum  juxta  caudam  tripliciter, 
ponensque  ante  fornacem,  calefac  ipsam  caudam  donee  mo- 
dicum candescat,  statimque  infige  manubrio  diligenter  ut 
bene  conjungatur,  et  firmiter  stabit.  Quod  si  aliquando 
vetustate,  vel  incuria,  cultellus  frangatur,  ita  ut  particula  ejus 
extra  manubrium  emineat,  calefac  forcipem  ferrarij  atque  ad- 
prehende  ipsam  caudam  et  aliquantisper  tene,  donee  in- 
calescat,  et  statim  extrahe.  Cum  sulphure,  quo  trito,  eodem 
modo  firmari  potest  cultellus,  non  solum  in  osse  sed  in  duro 
ligno. 


CAPUT  XCIIL 

DE  RUBRICANDO  OSSE. 

EST  etiam  herba  rubrica  dicta,  cujus  radix  est  longa, 
gracilis  et  rubicunda,  quae  effossa  sole  siccatur,  atque  in 
mortario  pila  tunditur,  et  sic  lexiva  perfusa  in  oUa  radi  ' 
coquitur.  Cui  cum  bene  bulluerit,  os  elephantis  seu  piscis 
vel  cervi  impositum,  rubrum  fit.  Possunt  etiam  ex  his 
ossibus  vel  cornibus  tornatili  opere  fieri  noda  ^  in  baculis 
episcoporum,  abbatium,  atque  minores  noduli  diversis  utensil- 
ibus  apti.  Quos  cum  acutis  ferris  tornaveris  cum  asperella 
sequabis,  et  colligens  rasuras  in  panno  Uneo  desuper  tornando 
fortiter  fricabis,  et  omnino  lucidi  fient.  Cineribus  cribatis  et 
laneo  panno  inditis  poteris  manubria  cornea,  et  venatorum 
cornua,  vel  tabulas  in  lucernis  polire ;  ad  ultimum  vero  ne 
obliviscaris  ea  nucis  oleo  superlinire. 

»  rasa  1  ^  "  nodi,"  two. 


TRANSLATION. 


385 


a  plain  handle,  and,  according  to  its  size,  make  the  opening  in 
which  the  blade  should  be  placed,  and  join  the  wood  care- 
fully into  it,  and  according  as  the  wood  is  fashioned  so  cause 
the  handle  of  the  knife  to  be  made.  Then  grind  some  clear 
Thus  into  the  finest  powder,  and  fill  the  opening  of  the  handle 
with  it,  and  envelop  the  blade  near  the  handle  with  a  wet 
cloth,  in  a  threefold  manner,  and  placing  it  before  the  furnace, 
warm  this  handle  until  it  slightly  glows,  and  immediately  fix  it 
carefully  in  the  handle  that  it  may  be  well  joined  in,  and  it 
will  stand  firmly.  But  should  the  knife  be  broken  at  any 
time,  so  that  a  small  portion  of  it  protrude  beyond  the  handle, 
warm  the  iron-worker's  pincers,  and  seize  this  handle  and 
hold  it  for  a  short  time  until  it  grow  warm,  and  immediately 
extract  it.  A  knife  can  also  be  fastened  in  the  same  manner, 
with  sulphur,  ground,  not  only  in  ivory  but  in  hard  wood. 


CHAPTER  XCIII, 

OF  REDDENING  IVORY. 

There  is  likewise  a  herb  called  rubrica,"  the  root  of  which 
is  long,  slender,  and  of  a  red  colour;  this  being  dug  up  is  dried 
in  the  sun  and  is  pounded  in  a  mortar  with  the  pestle,  and  so 
being  scraped  into  a  pot  and  a  lye  poured  over,  it  is  cooked. 
In  this,  when  it  has  well  boiled,  the  bone  of  the  elephant,  or 
fish,  or  stag,  being  placed,  is  made  red.  The  knobs  in  the 
staves  of  bishops  and  abbots,  and  the  smaller  nodules  fit  for 
different  utensils  can  also  be  made  in  turned  work  from  these 
bones  or  horns.  When  you  have  turned  which,  with  sharp 
instruments,  you  will  smooth  them  with  shave  grass,  and  col- 
lecting the  scrapings  in  a  linen  cloth,  you  will  rub  them 
strongly,  by  turning  upon  them,  and  they  are  made  quite 
bright.  You  will  be  able  to  polish  horn  handles,  and  the 
horns  of  huntsmen,  or  tablets  in  lanterns,  with  ashes,  sifted, 
and  set  in  a  linen  cloth ;  but  at  last  you  must  not  forget  to 
anoint  them  over  with  walnut  oil. 

c  c 


386 


THEOPHILI   LJBER  TIT. 


CAPUT  XCIV. 

DE  POLIENDIS  GEMMIS. 

/^RISTALLUM  quod  aqua  durata  in  glacieni,  et  multorum 
annorum  glacies  duratur  in  lapidem,  hoc  modo  limatur 
et  politur.  Tolle  confectionem  quse  dicitur  tenax,  de  qua 
supradictum  est,  adhibitamque  igni  donee  liquefiat,  consoli- 
dabis  christallum  ad  lignum  longum  quod  ei  siniiie  sit  in  gros- 
situdine.  Quod  cum  refrigeratum  fuerit  utrisque  manibus 
fricabis  super  l  ipidem  sabuleum  durum,  addila  aqua  donee 
formam  accipiat  quam  ei  dare  volueris,  deinde  super  alteram 
lapidem  ejuj^dem  generis  qui  sit  subtilior  et  sequalior  donee 
omnino  aequum  fiat.  Et  accipiens  tabuiam  plumbeam  sequa- 
lem,  pone  super  earn  tegulam  humidam  quam  cum  saliva  fric- 
abis super  cotem  duram,  atque  desuper  polies  ipsum  chris- 
tallum, donee  fulgorem  accipiat.  Ad  ultimum  vero  super 
hyrcinum  corium  non  denigratum  neque  unctum,  sed  in 
ligno  tensum  et  clavis  inferius  affixum,  fricaturam  tegulse 
pone  saliva  humidam,  et  desuper  dihgenter  frica,  donee  omnino 
liicidum  fiat.  Quod  si  christallum  sculpere  volueris,  accepto 
hyrco  duorum  vel  trium  annorum,  colligatisque  pedibus  ejus, 
incide  foramen  inter  pectus  ejus  et  ventrem,  in  loco  cordis,  et 
impone  christallum,  ita  ut  in  sanguine  ejus  jaceat,  donee  cale- 
fiat.  Quod  mox  ejiciens  incide  in  eo  quod  volueris,  quamdiu 
calor  ille  durat,  et  cum  ceperit  refrigescere  atque  durescere, 
rursum  repone  in  sanguine  hyrci,  calefactumque  denuo  ejice 
et  incide,  sicque  facies  donee  sculpturam  compleas ;  ad  ulti- 
mum vei  o  calefactum  et  ejectum  cum  panno  laneo  fricabis  ut 
cum  eodem  sanguine  ei  fulgorem  acquiras.  Si  autem  nodos 
facere  volueris  ex  christallo,  qui  baculis  episcoporum  vel 
caudae  labris  possint  inponi,  hoc  modo  perforabis  eos;  fac 
tibi  duos  malleos  mensura  minoris  digiti  grossos,  et  pene 
palmi  mensura  longos,  et  in  utraque  summitate  valde  graciles 
et  bene  calibatos.    Cumque  nodum  formaveris  incide  in  ligno 


TRANSLATION. 


387 


CHAPTER  XCIV. 

OF  POLISHING  GEMS. 

Crystal,  which  is  water  hardened  into  ice,  and  the  ice  of  great 
age  is  hardened  into  stone,  is  trimmed  and  poHshed  in  this 
manner.  Take  the  composition  which  is  called  tenax,  of 
which  mention  is  made  above,  and  applying  it  to  the  fire 
until  it  Hquefy,  you  will  fasten  the  crystal  to  a  long  wood, 
which  must  be  similar  to  it  in  thickness.  When  this  has  be- 
come cold,  you  will  rub  it  with  both  hands  upon  a  hard  sand- 
stone, water  being  added,  until  it  takes  the  form  which  you 
wish  to  give  it,  then  upon  another  stone  of  the  same  kind, 
which  must  be  finer  and  smoother,  until  it  be  made  quite 
smooth.  And  taking  a  flat  leaden  tablet,  place  moistened 
tile  upon  it,  which  you  will  rub  with  saliva  upon  a  hard  hone, 
and  you  polish  this  crystal  upon  it  until  it  takes  a  lustre. 
But  at  last,  place  the  rubbing  of  tile,  made  moist  with  saliva, 
upon  a  goat's  skin,  neither  blackened  nor  oiled,  but  stretched 
upon  wood  and  fixed  below  with  nails,  and  rub  carefully  upon 
it,  until  it  becomes  quite  bright.  But  should  you  wish  to 
sculp  crystal,  taking  a  goat  of  the  age  of  two  or  three  years 
and  binding  his  feet,  cut  an  opening  between  his  breast  and 
stomach,  in  the  position  of  the  heart,  and  lay  in  the  crystal, 
so  that  it  may  lie  in  its  blood  until  it  grow  warm.  Taking  it 
out  directly,  cut  what  you  please  in  it,  as  long  as  the  heat 
lasts,  and  when  it  has  begun  to  grow  cold  and  to  harden,  re- 
place it  again  in  the  blood  of  the  goat,  and  being  made  warm 
anew,  take  it  out  and  cut  it,  and  do  thus  until  you  complete 
the  sculpture ;  at  the  last,  being  made  warm  and  taken  out, 
you  will  rub  it  with  a  linen  cloth  so  that  with  the  same  blood 
you  can  procure  a  lustre  for  it.  Should  you,  however,  wish  to 
make  knobs  from  crystal,  which  can  be  placed  upon  the 
staves  of  bishops,  or  the  tips  of  the  stem,  you  will  perforate 
them  in  this  manner ;  make  two  hammers  for  yourself,  of 
the  thickness  of  the  little  finger,  and  almost  a  palm  in  length, 
and  at  each  end  very  pointed  and  well  steeled.  And  when 
you  have  formed  the  knob,  cut  a  hole  in  a  wood,  so  that  it 

c  c  2 


388 


THEUPIIILI  LIBER  III. 


foramen,  ita  ut  dimidiiis  in  eo  jacere  possit,  et  cum  cera  con- 
firmabis  eum  in  eodem  ligno  ut  adhsereat ;  tollensque  unum 
malleolum  percute  leniter  in  medio  nodi  in  uno  loco,  donee 
foramen  parvum  facias,  sicque  in  medio  percutiendo  et  in 
circuitu  diligenter  frangendo,  cavaturam  augebis.  Cumque, 
sic  persistendo,  ad  medituUium  nodi  perveneris,  converte  ilium 
et  in  alteram  partem  fac  similiter.  Quem  cum  transforaveris, 
percute  cuprum  longitudine  pedis  unius  et  rotundum,  ita  ut 
foramen  transire  possit,  accipiensque  sabulum  acutum  aqua 
mixtum,  mitte  in  foramen  et  cum  cupro  lima.  Cum  vero 
foramen  aliquantum  dilataveris,  percute  aliud  cuprum  gros- 
sius,  cum  quo  similiter  liraabis ;  et  si  opus  fuerit  addes  cuprum 
tertium  grossius.  Cumque  ut  volueris  foramen  ampliaverig, 
frange  sabuleum  lapidem  subtiliter,  et  hoc  imposito  cum 
cupro  novo  limabis  donee  sequale  fiat.  Deinde  toUe  plum- 
bum pari  modo  rotundum,  additaque  fricatura  tegulae,  cum 
saliva,  polies  foramen  interius,  ipsumque  nodum  sicut  supra 
exterius.  Purissimum  christallum  rotundissimum  formatum 
et  politum,  aquaque  vel  saliva  madefactum  et  claro  soli  ad- 
hibitum,  isca  quam  tenturam  vocant  supposita  ita,  ut  splendor 
in  eam  vibret,  ignem  velocissimum  trahit.  Quod  si  chris- 
tallum secare  volueris,  infige  quatuor  clavos  ligneos  super 
scamnum,  inter  quos  christallum  firmiter  jaceat,  qui  clavi  sic 
stabunt,  ut  duo  superius  et  duo  inferius  sic  strictim  conjun- 
gantur,  ut  serra  inter  eos  trahi  vix  possit,  et  in  nuUam  partem 
flecti,  imponensque  serram  ferream  atque  superjaciens  sabu- 
lum acutum  aqua  commixtum,  fac  stare  duos  qui  eam  trahant, 
quique  sabulum  cum  aqua  sine  intermissione  desuper  jaciant. 
Hoc  tamdiu  fiat,  donee  christallum  in  duabus  partibus  divi- 
datur,  quas  superfricabis  et  polies  ut  supra.  Eodem  modo 
secantur,  fricantur  atque  poliuntur  onix  et  berillus,  smarag- 
dus,  jaspis  et  calcedonius,  ceterique  lapides  preciosi ;  fit  etiam 
tenuissimus  pulvis  de  fragmentis  christalli  qui,  mixtus  aqua, 
ponitur  super  sequalem  lignum  de  tilia,  et  desuper  fricantur 


TRANSLATION. 


389 


may  be  able  to  lie  half  in  it,  and  you  will  fasten  it  with  wax 
in  this  same  piece  of  wood  that  it  may  adhere ;  and  taking  a 
small  hammer  strike  Hghtly  in  the  middle  of  the  knob  in  one 
place  until  you  make  a  small  hole,  and  so  by  striking  in  the 
centre  and  by  carefully  breaking  around  it  you  will  increase 
the  hollow.    And  when  by  thus  persevering  you  have  arrived 
at  the  very  middle  of  the  knob,  turn  it  round  and  do  similarly 
upon  the  other  side.    When  you  have  transpierced  this,  beat 
a  piece  of  copper  the  length  of  a  foot,  and  round,  so  that  it 
can  pass  through  the  opening,  and  taking  sharp  sand  mixed 
with  water,  place  it  in  the  opening  and  file  with  the  copper. 
When  you  have  somewhat  dilated  the  opening,  beat  another 
thicker  copper,  with  which  you  will  file  in  a  similar  manner, 
and  should  need  be  you  add  a  third  thicker  copper.  And 
when  you  have  enlarged  the  opening  as  you  may  wish,  break 
a  sand-stone  very  finely,  and  this  being  placed  in,  you  will 
file  it  with  a  new  copper  until  it  become  even.    Then  take  a 
piece  of  lead,  rounded  in  the  same  manner,  and  the  powder 
of  tile,  with  saliva  being  added,  you  polish  the  opening  inside, 
and  the  knob  itself  outside,  as  above.    Purest  crystal  of  a 
very  round  form,  and  pohshed  and  moistened  with  water  or 
saliva,  and  exposed  in  the  hght  of  the  sun,  tinder  which  they 
call  "  tentura  "  being  placed  under  it,  so  that  the  light  may 
shine  upon  it,  attracts  fire  with  the  greatest  velocity.  But 
should  you  wish  to  cut  crystal,  fix  four  wooden  pegs  upon  a 
bench,  between  which  the  crystal  can  lie  firmly,  which  pegs 
will  so  stand,  that  two  must  be  joined  together  above  and 
two  below,  so  closely  that  the  saw  can  scarcely  be  drawn  be- 
tween them,  and  that  it  can  in  no  part  be  turned,  and  placing 
on  the  iron  saw,  and  casting  over  it  sharp  sand  mixed  with 
water,  make  two  (assistants)  stand  who  can  draw  it,  and  who 
must  cast  the  sand  with  water  upon  it  without  intermission. 
This  must  be  done  until  the  crystal  be  divided  into  two  pieces* 
which  you  will  rub  and  pohsh  over  as  above.    In  the  same 
manner  the  onyx  and  beryl,  malachite,  jasper  and  agate  and 
other  precious  stones  are  cut,  rubbed  and  polished ;  a  very 
fine  powder  is  also  made  of  fragments  of  crystal  which,  mixed 
with  water,  is  placed  upon  a  flat  piece  of  lime-wood,  and  these 


390  

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRANSLATION. 


391 


same  stones  are  rubbed  upon  it  and  polished.  The  amethyst, 
which  is  harder,  is  polished  in  this  manner.  There  is  a  stone 
called  emery,  which  is  broken  until  like  sand,  and  is  placed, 
mixed  with  water,  upon  a  smooth  copper  tablet,  and  by 
rubbing  upon  it  the  amethyst  is  fashioned.  The  washing 
which  flows  from  it  is  carefully  received  in  a  clean  basin,  and 
when  it  has  stood  for  a  night,  on  the  day  following  the  water 
is  entirely  withdrawn  and  the  powder  is  dried,  this  is  after- 
wards placed,  moistened  with  saliva,  upon  a  smooth  lime- 
wood  tablet,  and  the  amethyst  is  polished  upon  it.  Glass 
stones,  also,  are  rubbed  and  polished  in  the  same  manner 
as  crystal. 


CHAPTER  XCV. 

OF  PEARLS. 

Pearls  are  found  in  sea-shells  and  (shells)  of  other  waters; 
these  are  perforated  with  a  fine  steeled  instrument  which  is 
fixed  in  wood,  having  a  small  wheel  of  lead,  also  another 
wood  in  which  it  may  be  turned,  to  which  a  strap  must  be 
placed  by  which  it  may  be  revolved.  But  should  it  be  neces- 
sary that  the  aperture  of  any  pearl  be  made  larger,  a  wire 
may  be  placed  in  the  opening  with  a  little  fine  sand,  one  end 
of  which  may  be  held  in  the  teeth,  the  other  in  the  left  hand, 
and  by  the  right  the  pearl  is  conducted  upwards  and  down- 
wards, and  in  the  mean  time  sand  is  applied,  that  the  aperture 
may  become  wider.  Sea  shells  are  also  cut  into  pieces  and 
are  filed  as  pearls,  sufficiently  useful  upon  gold,  and  they  are 
polished  as  above. 


THEOPHILl   LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  XCVI.  • 

DE  AUREA  SCRIPTURA. 

Oil  quis  scripturam  quserit  sibi  scribere  pulchram 
^  Ex  auro,  legat  hoc  quod  vili  carmine  dico. 
Aurum  cum  puro  mero  molat  usque  solutum 
Hoc  nimium  fuerit ;  moneo  quod  saepe  la  vet  illud^ 
Nam  quia  deposcit  hoc  candens  pagina  libri. 
Exin  thaurini  faciat  pinguedine  felHs 
Hoc  liquidum,  si  vult  seu  cum  pinguedine  gummi. 
Atque  logo  pariter  calamo  cum  ceperit  aurum 
Ilium  commoveat,  pulchre  si  scribere  quserit. 
Hinc  siccata  sed  ut  fuerit  scriptura,  nitentem 
Hunc  nimium  faciat  ursi  cum  dente  ferocis. 


CAPUT  XCVII.  ' 

DE  FLORIBUS  AD  SCRIBENDUM. 

F LORES  in  varios  qui  vult  mutare  colores 
Causa  scribendi  quos  libri  pagina  poscit, 
Est  opus  ut  segetes  in  summo  mane  pererret 
Et  tunc  diversos  flores  ortuque  recentes 
Inveniat,  properetque  sibi  decerpere  eosdem. 
Cumque  domi  fuerint  caveat  ne  ponat  in  unum 
Illos,  sed  faciat  quod  talis  res  sibi  poscit  vel  quserit. 
Dum  super  sequalem  petram  contriveris  istos 
Flores,  incoctum  pariter  tum  congere  gypsum. 
Sic  tibi  siccatos  poteris  servare  colores. 
Ex  quibus  in  viridem  si  vis  mutare  colorem, 
Calcem  commisce  cum  floribus,  inde  videbis 
Quod  tibi  mandavi,  veluti  ipse  probavi. 


Eraclii "  videiur  esse. 


'  "  Eraclii  '  capitula  est. 


TRANSLATION. 


393 


CHAPTER  XCVI.  ' 

OF  WRITING  IN  GOLD. 

Should  any  one  wish  to  fashion  beautiful  writing  in  gold,  let 
him  read  what  I  say  in  lowly  verse.  Let  him  grind  gold 
with  pure  wine  until  it  has  become  well  dissolved ;  I  advise 
that  he  should  often  wash  it,  for  the  white  page  of  the  book 
demands  this.  Let  him  afterwards  make  this  liquid,  with  the 
gluten  of  bull's  skin,  or,  if  he  wish,  with  the  gluten  of  gum. 
And  when  he  has  taken  the  gold  with  a  stick  or  pen,  let  him 
stir  it,  should  he  seek  to  write  beautifully.  But  after  this, 
when  the  writing  has  become  dry,  let  him  make  it  very 
shining  with  the  tooth  of  a  wild  bear. 


CHAPTER  XCVn.  =^ 

OF  FLOWERS  USED  FOR  WRITING. 

He  who  wishes  to  change  flowers  into  various  colours  which, 
in  the  business  of  writing,  the  page  of  the  book  demands, 
must  wander  over  the  cornfields  in  early  morning,  and  at  the 
rising  of  the  sun  he  can  then  find  various  fresh  flowers,  and 
let  him  hasten  to  pluck  these  for  himself.  And  when  they 
are  at  home,  let  him  take  care  that  he  does  not  lay  them  to- 
gether, but  let  him  do  what  this  thing  demands  of  him. 
When  you  have  bruised  these  flowers  upon  a  smooth  stone, 
then  pile  up  unburnt  gypsum  together  with  them.  Thus  dry, 
you  can  preserve  the  colours  for  yourself.  If  you  wish  to 
change  the  colours  of  these  to  green,  mix  lime  with  the 
flowers,  you  will  then  see  that  I  have  bid  you  the  thing 
which  I  have  proved. 


'  Theophilus  here  quotes  Eraclius. 


^  From  Eraclius. 


394 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


i 

CAPUT  XCVIIL 

DE  EDERA  AC  LACCA, 

ROGATO  a  te  frater  karissime  ut  dicam  tibi  de  hiedera, 
quam  poetae  atque  artifices  nimium  dilexerunt,  quia 
occultas  vires  quas  in  se  continet  agnoverunt :  poetarura  enim 
carmina  cum  recitarentur  in  theatro  ante  conventurn  romano- 
rum,  coronabantur  hedera : — artifices  vero  antiqui  ex  hac 
multos  colores  invenerunt,  ex  quibus  unum  scripto  tibi  osten- 
dam.  Mense  martio,  cum  herbse  arboresque  succura  de  matre 
terra  suscipiunt,  et  iterum  vires  crescendi  recipiunt,  subulam 
accipe  et  ramusculos  hederse  perfora  locatim,  et  egreditur 
gummi  liquor  ex  eis,  de  quo  sanguineus  coquendo  color  ef- 
ficitur,  qui  lacca  nuncupatur.  Decoque  ergo  gummi  liquorem 
quern  tibi  supra  dixi  cum  urina,  et  habebis  sanguineum  co- 
lorem  qui  est  utilis  scripturis  atque  picturis.  Ex  hoc  ergo 
parcia^  efficitur  qui  pelles  arietum  ac  caprarum  rosea  colore 
decorat. 


CAPUT  XCIX. 

DE  VIRIDI  COLORE. 

VI  RID  EM  si  quis  quserit  colorem  ad  scribendi  usum  fa- 
cere,  accipiat  folia  virida  ex  herba  quae  vuigo  morella 
nuncupatur,  eamque  cum  creta  Candida  super  petram  marmo- 
ream  diligenter  terat,  donee  sint  valde  liquida,  atque  ad  usum 
scribendi  optima.  Hoc  autem  facto,  pennam  facere  tempe- 
ratam,  seu  pincellum  in  hunc  colorem  inunge,  atque  illumina 
capitales  litteras  quas  ex  eodem  colore  vis  illuminare.  Sed 
cave  frater,  ne  nimium  ponas  ex  creta  cum  succo  foliorum. 


'  "  Phoenicia."  Qu.  ? 


TRANSLATION. 


395 


CHAPTER  XCVIII. 

OF  THE  IVY  AND  OF  LAKE. 

At  your  request,  dearest  brother,  that  I  should  discourse  to 
you  of  the  ivy,  which  the  poets  and  artists  much  loved,  on 
account  of  the  secret  powers  which  they  recognised  it  con- 
tained within  itself : — for  the  songs  of  poets,  when  they  had 
been  recited  in  the  theatre  before  an  assembly  of  the  Romans, 
were  accustomed  to  be  crowned  with  ivy  : — the  ancient  artists 
also  invented  many  colours  from  this,  one  of  which,  in 
writing,  I  can  show  you.  In  the  month  of  March,  when  plants 
and  trees  take  up  their  sap  from  mother  earth,  take  an  auger 
and  perforate  the  small  boughs  of  the  ivy  in  places,  and  a 
gummy  hquid  will  flow  out  from  them,  from  which  a  blood 
colour  is  made,  by  seething,  which  is  called  lake.  Seeth 
therefore  the  gum  liquor,  which  I  have  before  mentioned  to 
you,  in  urine,  and  you  will  have  the  blood  colour,  which  is 
useful  in  writings  and  paintings.  From  this  also  the  ^'  par- 
cia  "  ^  is  made,  which  ornaments  rams  and  goats'  skins  with 
a  rose  colour. 


CHAPTER  XCIX. 

OF  A  GREEN  COLOUR. 

Should  one  wish  to  make  a  green  colour  fit  for  writing  let  him 
take  the  green  leaves  of  the  plant  which  is  commonly  called 
nightshade,  and  carefully  grind  it  upon  a  marble  stone  with 
white  chalk  until  they  be  quite  liquid,  and  best  suited  for  the 
purpose  of  writing.  This  being  done,  dip  a  pen,  or  anoint  a 
pencil  in  this  colour,  and  illuminate  capital  letters  which  you 
wish  to  ornament  with  the  same  colour.  But  beware, 
brother,  that  you  do  not  put  too  much  chalk  with  the  juice  of 
the  leaves. 

Phoenicia."  Qzt.  ?    See  mte.      Edera  ac  Lacca." 


396 


THEOPHILl   LIBER  111. 


CAPUT  C. 

ITERUM  DE  EODEM. 

COLOREM  viridem  qui  vult  ad  usum  scribendi  sibi  facere, 
in  vase  ereo  mel  cum  aceto  valde  immixtum  sequo  pon- 
dere  infundat,  ac  deinde  in  sterquilinio,  ubi  calet  plus,  illud 
abscondat. 


CAPUT  CI. 

ITEM. 

ACCIPE  vas  cupreum,  et  lava  illud  intus  et  foris  et  mitte 
ad  solem  ut  siccetur.  Postea  accepto  melle  purissimo 
perunge  intus  et  foris.  Deinde  contere  sal  super  lapidem,  et 
cum  eo  totum  prsedictum  vas  asperge,  et  tunc  idem  vas  pone 
super  scultellam  plenam  aceto,  positam  in  medio  stercoris 
equorum,  ita  tamen,  ut  de  stercore  neque  vas  cupreum,  neque 
acetum,  contaminetur ;  et  sic  dimitte  stare  per  quinque  aut 
sex  dies.  Postea  tolle  idem  vas,  remoto  stercore,  et  mitte  ad 
solem  donee  siccetur,  et  tunc  cum  cultello  abrade  totum  colo- 
rem  qui  de  eodem  vase  confectus  est,  et  mitte  eum  in  aliquid 
vas,  et  misce  eum  adhuc  cum  melle,  et  sic  depinge. 


CAPUT  CII.  ■ 

DE  SCULPTURA  VITRI. 

VOS  artifices  qui  sculpere  vultis  honeste 
Vitrum,  nunc^vobis  pandani,  velut  ipse  probavi. 
Vermes  quaesivi  pingues  quos  vertit  aratrum 

'  "Eraclii"  cajniiola  eat. 


TRANSLATION. 


397 


CHAPTER  C. 

OF  THE  SAME  AGAIN. 

He  who  wishes  to  make  for  himself  a  green  colour  for  service 
in  writing,  let  him  pour  honey,  well  mixed  with  vinegar,  into 
a  brass  vessel,  and  then  let  him  bury  it  in  stable  litter,  where 
it  heats  the  most. 


CHAPTER  CI. 

THE  SAME. 

Take  a  copper  vessel  and  wash  it  within  and  witliout,  and  place 
it  in  the  sun  that  it  may  become  dry.  Afterwards,  taking 
the  purest  honey,  anoint  it  over  within  and  without.  Then 
grind  salt  upon  a  stone,  and  sprinkle  it  over  the  whole  afore- 
said vessel,  and  then  place  the  same  vessel  over  a  basin  filled 
with  vinegar  placed  in  the  midst  of  horse  litter,  so,  however, 
that  neither  the  copper  vessel  nor  the  vinegar  be  contaminated 
by  the  litter ;  and  so  leave  it  to  stand  for  five  or  six  days. 
Afterwards,  the  litter  being  removed,  take  the  same  vessel 
and  place  it  in  the  sun  until  it  becomes  dry,  and  then  scrape 
with  a  knife  all  the  colour  which  is  perfected  upon  the  vase, 
and  place  it  in  any  vessel  and  mix  it  with  yet  more  honey, 
and  so  paint  with  it. 


CHAPTER  CII.  ' 

OF  SCULPTURING  GLASS. 

Artists  !  who  wish  to  engrave  glass  in  a  beautiful  manner, 
I  now  can  teach  you,  as  I  have  myself  made  trial.  I  have 
sought  the  gross  worms  which  the  plough  turns  up  in  the 

'  From  Eraclius. 


398 


THEOPHILT   LIBER  ITI. 


Per  terram,  atque  simul  jussit  me  quaerere  acetiim. 
Utilis  ars  istis  rebus  calidumque  cruorem. 
Ex  hyrco  ingenti,  quern  sellers  tempore  parvo 
Herba  ex  hedera  forti  poni  tecto  religatum. 
Sanguine  cum  calido  post  haec  vermes  et  acetum 
Infudi,  ac  totam  fialam  clare  renitentem 
Unxi ;  quo  facto  temptavi  sculpere  vitrum 
Cum  duro  lapide  piritis  nomine  dicto. 


CAPUT  cm.  ' 

DE  PICTURA   EX  VITRO. 

EX  vitro  si  quis  depingere  vascula  quaerit, 
Eligat  ipse  duas  de  rufo  marmore  petras. 
Inter  quas  vitrum  romanum  conterat,  et  cum 
Ut  pulvis  terrse  fuerit  pariter  resolutum. 
Hoc  faciat  liquidum  clara  pinguedine  gummi  ; 
Septies  hoc  scilicet  aqua  nitide  ablue  clara. 
Post  hisc  depingat  paginas  quas  finxit  honeste 
Figulus  :  hoc  facto  succense  inponat  easdem 
Fornaci,  caveatque,  simul  quo  terra  probata 
Has  teneat,  quo  sic  valeant  obstare  calori  : 
Illasque  faciat  plena  virtute  nitentes. 


CAPUT  CIV.  ' 

DE  VIRIDI  VITRO. 

QUI  vultis  preciosum  vitrum  facere,  auribus  percipite  banc 
artem  quam  vobis  de  vitro  scribere  curavi.  Pulverera 
arsi  sulphuris  cum  viiide  vitro  indagavi,  pariterque  pulvei  em 
arsi  cupri  michi  qufesivi.    Deinde  vitrum  valde  clarum  supra 

'  "  Eraclii  "  capitula  est.  *  "  Eraelii  "  cap.  eat. 


TRANSLATION. 


399 


ground,  and  the  art  necessary  in  these  things  also  bid  me  to 
procure  vinegar  and  the  warm  blood  of  a  lusty  goat,  which  I 
was  careful  to  place  under  the  roof  for  a  short  time,  bound 
with  a  strong  ivy  plant.  After  this  I  infused  the  worms 
and  vinegar  with  the  warm  blood,  and  I  anointed  the  whole 
clearly  shining  vessel ;  which  being  done  I  essayed  to  sculp 
the  glass  with  the  hard  stone  called  pyrites. 


CHAPTER  cm.  ' 

OF  A  PICTURE   FROM  GLASS. 

Should  any  one  desire  to  paint  small  vases  in  glass,  let  him 
choose  two  stones  of  red  marble,  between  these  let  him  grind 
Roman  glass,  and  when  it  has  been  reduced  into  powder  like 
dust,  let  him  make  it  liquid  with  clear  gluten  of  gum  ;  wash 
this,  however,  cleanly  seven  times  in  clear  water.  Let  him 
after  this  paint  the  scrolls  which  the  workman  has  hand- 
somely fashioned  :  this  done  let  him  place  these  in  the  glow- 
ing furnace,  and  let  him  be  careful  that  he  keep  these  in  the 
assayed  earth,  by  which  means  they  may  be  able  to  withstand 
the  heat;  and  let  him  fashion  them  glowing  with  full  per- 
fection. 


CHAPTER  CIV.  ^ 

OF  GREEN  GLASS. 

You  who  wish  to  make  costly  glass,  learn,  with  your  ears, 
this  art  of  glass-making  which  1  have  taken  pains  to  write  for 
you.  I  sought  out  the  powder  of  calcined  sulphur  with  green 
glass,  and  likewise  procured  the  powder  of  burnt  copper. 

^  From  Eraclius. 

*  This  chapter  is  found  in  Eraclius,  but  written  in  v(  rsp. 


400 


THEOPHILT  LIBER  TIT. 


petram  marmoream  redegi  in  pulverem,  atque  sulphuris  ac 
ciipri  pulverem  valde  tritum  commiscui ;  facta  autem  tali  com- 
mixtione,  illam  puro  gummi  liquore  temperavi,  et  super  testam 
ex  hac  causa  probandi  pincello  traxi,  atque  in  fornacem 
eandem  posui.  Ast  ubi  rufa  fuit,  illam  a  fornace  extraxi,  et 
commixtio  quam  super  testam  pinxi  in  viride  vitrum  con- 
versa  est. 


CAPUT  CV.  ' 

DE  PICTURA  CUM  VITRO. 

VITRUM  quod  nimium  viret  si  quaeris  ad  pingendi  usum 
tibi  facere,  accipe  cupri  rubiginem,  itemque  pulverem 
arsi  cupri,  ac  fac  hoc  quod  utilis  ars  tibi  quaerit.  Diligenter 
rubiginem  et  pulverem  cupri  cum  vitro  claro  tere,  et  facta  tali 
commixtione,  causa  probandi  ex  ea  super  testam  pinge  ac 
deinde  in  fornacem  valde  incensam  illam  pone.  Ast  ubi 
pictura  nimio  lucida  est  super  eandem  testam  illam  a  fornace 
recipe :  ut  autem  frigida  erit,  colorem  preciosum  in  se  re- 
cipiet.  Hoc  ideo  frater  tibi  dico,  quia  quamdiii  est  vitrum 
calore  perfusum  non  proprium  sibi  dedit  colorem. 


CAPUT  CVL  ' 

DE  ALBO  VITRO. 

y4  LBUM  vitrum  si  quaeris  tibi  fucere  ad  pingendi  usum, 
•^^^  candid um  sulphur  cum  vitro  claro  diligenter  tere.  Cum 
autem  in  pulverem  redactum  fuerit  cum  sulphure,  ilkid  super 
spissam  testam  pone,  ac  deinde  in  fornacem  valde  in- 
censam pone.    Ut  autem  in  calore  ignis  conglutinatum  est 


'  "  Eraclii "  videtur  esse. 


"  idem. 


TRANSLATION. 


401 


Then  I  reduced  very  clear  glass  into  powder  upon  a  marble 
stone,  and  mixed  the  powder  of  sulphur  and  copper  well 
ground;  this  mixture  being  made,  I  tempered  it  with  pure, 
gum  water,  and  drew  with  the  pencil  upon  a  cup,  for  proof, 
and  placed  it  in  the  furnace.  But  when  it  became  red,  I  with- 
drew it  from  the  furnace,  and  the  mixture  which  I  painted 
over  the  cup  became  converted  into  a  green  glass. 


CHAPTER  CV.  ' 

OF  A  PICTURE  WITH  GLASS. 

Should  you  desire  to  make  a  very  green  glass,  for  paint- 
ing, take  the  rust  of  copper,  also  the  powder  of  burnt  copper, 
and  do  as  follows  according  to  art.  Grind  carefully  the 
rust  and  powder  of  copper  with  clear  glass,  and  such  mix- 
ture being  made,  for  proof  paint  with  it  upon  a  cup  and 
then  place  it  in  a  very  hot  furnace.  But  when  the  picture  is 
very  glowing  upon  this  same  cup,  take  it  from  the  furnace : 
when  it  is  cold  however  it  takes  a  costly  colour.  I  tell  you 
this  therefore,  brother,  because  so  long  as  the  glass  is  pene- 
trated by  heat  it  does  not  take  its  proper  colour. 


CHAPTER  CVI.  ' 

OF  WHITE  GLASS. 

Should  you  seek  to  make  white  glass  for  painting,  grind 
carefully  white  sulphur  with  clear  glass.  When  however  it 
has  been  reduced  to  powder  with  the  sulphur,  lay  it  upon  a 
thick  cup  and  then  place  it  in  a  very  hot  furnace.  When 
it  is  agglutinated  by  the  heat  of  the  fire,  withdraw  it  from 


1  From  Eraclius, 


*  From  the  same. 

D  D 


402 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  HI. 


illud  ab  igne  extrahe.  Et  si  ex  eodem  scultellas  arte  figuli 
studiose  factas,  vis  depingere,  illud  ad  usum  contere  picturae, 
et  te  verte  ad  hanc  aitem  quee  in  primo  libro  scripta  est. 
Hsec  enim  ita  se  habet.  Ex  vitro  si  quis  depingere  vascula 
quserit." 


CAPUT  CVIL  • 

DE  SCULPENDIS  GEMMIS. 

QUI  cupit  egregios  lapides  irrumpere  ferro, 
Quos  dilexerimt  reges  nimium  super  aurum 
Urbis  Romanse  qui  celsas  jam  tenuere 
Artes,  ingenium  quod  ego  sub  mente  profunda 
Inveni,  accipiat,  quern  valde  est  preciosum. 
Urinam  mihi  qusesivi  pariterque  cruorem 
Ex  hyrco  ingenti,  modico  sub  tempore  pastum 
Hedera,  quo  facto,  calefacto  sanguine  gemmas 
Incidi,  veluti  monstravit  Plinius  auctor, 
Artes  qui  scripsit,  quas  plebs  Romana  probavit, 
Atque  simul  lapidum  virtutes  scripsit  honeste ; 
Quorum  qui  noscit  vires,  plus  diligit  illos ; 
Nam  primi  reges  urbem  qui  jam  tenuerunt, 
Gemmis  ornarunt  vestes  auro  renitentes, 
Ex  quibus  insignis  primus  fuit  Aurelianus. 
Qui  proprias  vestes  gemmis  contexit  et  auro. 


CAPUT  CVIII.  ' 

DE  PRECIOSIS  GEMMIS. 

PRECIOSAS  gemmas  si  quaeris  lucidas  facere  accipe  ea 
quae  sunt  hie  scripta.  Petram  marmoream  valde  sequa- 
lem  tibi  aquire,  facitoque  hoc  quod  utilis  ars  tibi  ostendit. 
Gemmam  sequalem  super  hanc  petram  laevi  extrica  manu,  sic- 
que  obscuritatem  cito  perdet,  et  recipiet  preciosum  nitorem. 


"  Eraclii "  cap.  est. 


2  idem. 


TRANSLATION. 


403 


the  fire.  And  if  you  wish  to  paint  upon  those  plates,  care- 
fully made  by  the  potter's  art,  grind  it  for  the  service  of  the 
picture,  and  turn  towards  that  art  which  is  described  in  the 
first  book.  This  so  contains  it :  "  Ex  vitro  si  quis  depingere 
vascula  quaerit." — (C.  103.) 


CHAPTER  CVII.  • 

OF  SCULPTURING  GEMS. 

Who  should  desire  to  cut  with  iron  the  rare  stones  which  the 
rulers  of  Rome,  who  formerly  sustained  the  noble  arts,  much 
delighted  in  upon  gold,  let  him  know  the  invention,  which  I  with 
profound  thought  have  discovered,  which  is  very  precious.  I 
procured  urine  with  the  fresh  blood  of  a  lusty  goat,  fed  for  a 
short  time  upon  ivy,  which  being  done,  I  cut  the  gems  in  the 
warm  blood,  as  the  author  Pliny  has  pointed  out,  who  wrote 
upon  the  arts,  which  the  Roman  people  put  to  proof,  and  who 
likewise  well  described  the  virtues  of  stones;  he  who  knows  the 
powers  of  which  favours  them  the  more.  For  the  first  kings, 
who  long  since  held  the  city,  ornamented,  with  gems,  their 
garments  resplendent  with  gold,  of  whom  the  most  remark- 
able was  Aurelian,  who  covered  his  robes  all  over  with  gems 
and  gold. 


CHAPTER  CVni.  ' 

OF  PRECIOUS  GEMS. 

Should  you  desire  to  make  precious  gems  bright,  know 
what  is  here  written.  Procure  a  marble  slab,  very  smooth, 
and  act  as  useful  art  points  out  to  you.  Rub  with  a  light 
hand  the  smooth  gem  over  this  stone,  and  it  thus  soon 

'  From  Eraclius.  •  idem. 

D  D  2 


404  THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 

Sed  tibi  frater  sit  notum  si  dura  fuerit  gemma  atque  sequalis 
magis  lucida  ac  perspicua  erit. 


CAPUT  CIX.  • 

DE  SCULPENDIS  GEMMIS. 

SUNT  nonnulli  qui  ferris  ad  incidendos  lapides  tempera- 
mentum  quaerunt  ideoque  scripsi  hanc  artem  quam  pro- 
bavi  ut  et  periti  artifices  sciant.  Hyrcinum  ssevum  tempore 
illo  cum  ureretur  yrcus  amore  accepi,  atque  ferrum  quod 
temperare  volui  in  illius  pinguedine  extinxi,  sicque  in  maxi- 
mam  versum  est  duritiam. 


CAPUT  ex.  ' 

DE  EBORE  PETALA  AURI  DECORANDO. 

OMNIS  incisio  quae  in  ebore  decoratur  petulam  auri  sibi 
quserit.  Quam  si  vis  super  ebur  facere  ponere,  facito 
hoc  quod  tibi  scripto  ostendo.  Quaere  tibi  clarum  ex  valde 
clarum  gummi  liquorem,  qui  ex  vesica  cethi  fit.  Hsec  enim 
vulgariter  huso  nuncupatur.  Si  autem  ex  eadem  habueris, 
partim  hanc  decoque  cum  aqua  in  vase,  ille  moxque  in  gummi 
Hquorem  convertitur.  Ex  eodem  ergo  incisionem  eboris 
quam  vis  auro  decorare,  pincello  unge,  ac  deinde  petulam,  re- 
motus  a  vento,  pone. 


'  "  Eraclii  "  cap.  est. 


idem. 


TRANSLATION. 


405 


loses  its  dulness  and  receives  a  valuable  lustre.  But  note, 
brother  !  should  the  gem  be  hard  and  smooth  it  will  be  the 
more  bright  and  clear. 


CHAPTER  CIX.  ' 

OF  CUTTING  GEMS. 

There  are  some  who  seek  a  tempering  for  irons,  for  cutting 
stones,  I  have  therefore  written  this  art  which  I  have  tried, 
that  skilful  artificers  may  know  it  also.  I  took  a  wild  goat 
when  in  heat,  and  quenched  the  iron  which  I  wished  to 
temper  in  his  fat,  and  it  was  thus  changed  to  the  greatest 
hardness. 


CHAPTER  ex.  ' 

OF  ORNAMENTING  IVORY  WITH  GOLD  LEAF. 

All  sculpture  which  ornaments  ivory  demands  leaf  gold. 
Should  you  wish  to  cause  this  to  be  placed  upon  ivory,  do 
what  I  point  out  to  you  in  writing.  Seek  glaire  and  the 
very  clear  gummy  liquid  which  is  made  from  the  bladder  of 
a  large  fish.  This  is  vulgarly  called  ^'  huso."  Should  you 
possess  this,  cook  a  portion  of  it  in  a  vessel  with  water,  and 
it  is  immediately  turned  into  a  gum  liquor.  When  you  wish 
therefore  to  decorate  the  sculpture  of  ivory  with  gold,  anoint 
it  with  this  same  (liquor),  with  a  pencil,  and  then,  removed 
from  the  wind,  lay  on  the  leaf. 


'  From  Eraclius, 


2  idem. 


406 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


CAPUT  CXI.  ' 

DE  CUPRO  FELLIS  PINGUEDINE  DEAURANDO. 

EX  fellis  pinguedine  si  cuprum  quaeris  deaurare  illud  prius 
cultello  rade,  ac  deinde  cum  ursino  dente  festina  luci- 
dum  facere ;  et  hoc  facto,  fellis  pinguediiiem  super  illud  cum 
pincello  facete  trahe,  cumque  siccata  fuerit  iterum  atque  ite- 
rum  trahe,  super  hanc  eandem  pinguedinem,  et  cave  ne  plus 
trahas  pincellum  in  unum  locum  quam  in  alterum,  sed  sit 
sequaliter  fellis  liquore  coopertum.  Ne  tibi  videatur  falsum 
quod  dico,  qui  hanc  artem  veram  esse  probavi,  atque  auxili^ 
ante  deo,  qui  fons  est  sapientise,  excogitavi. 


DE  TEMPERAMENTO  VESICAE  ESCINI. 

VESICAM  husonis  mollifica  in  aqua  donee  earn  inter 
manus  pinsando,  ex  ea  facias  quasi  cerotum,  et  tunc 
mitte  cam  in  ollam  in  limpidissimam  aquam,  et  pone  ad  focum 
ut  non  bulliat ;  sed  tantum  calorem  habeat  ut  liquefactam,  in 
aquam  convertatur.  Dein  cola  eam  per  mundum  pannum 
in  pelvim,  et  sine  quod  in  frigido  loco  ad  ventum  accedat  ut 
quasi  coagulet.  Cum  digitum  super  ponens  inpresseris,  si 
viscus  resistit  et  ab  ilia  impressione  non  frangitur,  hquefac  ad 
ignem,  et  funde  super  aurum  et  operare  in  stupa  nimis  calida. 
Si  auteni  viscus  nimis  crassescat  admitte  parum  aquse  et  ope- 
rare. Si  autem  tam  mollis  sit  quod  non  possit  impressionem 
digiti  sustentare,  coque  melius  ad  ignem  facile  poteris  et  hunc 
viscum  mollire  firmum  facere.  Nunquam  gummi  addas  auro 
vel  aliis  metallis  :  Nam  cito  cadet  quidquid,  id  gravis,  ex  eo 
glutinatum  erit,  exceptis  coloribus,  qui  etiam  non  perstabunt, 
nisi  optime  conterantur  et  tenuissime  libris  illiniantur. 

*  "  Eraclii "  cap.  est. 


TRANSLATION. 


407 


CHAPTER  CXI.  ' 

OF  GILDING  COPPER  WITH  GALL. 

Should  you  wish  to  gild  copper  with  the  unctuous  substance 
of  gall,  first  scrape  it  with  a  knife,  and  then  with  a  bear's 
tooth  quickly  pohsh  it ;  and  this  being  done,  paint  the  gall 
with  a  pencil  over  it,  and  when  it  has  become  dry,  paint  it 
again  and  again,  and  take  care  that  you  do  not  draw  the 
pencil  more  in  one  place  than  another,  but  that  it  be  equally 
covered  with  the  liquor  of  gall.  Let  not  what  I  tell  you  ap- 
pear false,  who  have  proved  this  art  to  be  true,  and  have  in- 
vented it,  the  God,  whose  fountain  is  of  wisdom,  assisting. 


OF  THE  TEMPERING  OF  THE  STURGEOn's  BLADDER. 

Soften  the  sturgeon's  bladder  in  water  until,  by  bruising  it 
between  the  hands,  you  can  make  it  hke  a  cerate,  and  then 
place  it  in  very  clear  water  in  a  pot,  and  put  it  to  the  fire,  so 
that  it  may  not  boil,  but  may  receive  such  heat  that,  being 
liquefied,  it  may  be  converted  into  water.  Then  strain  it 
into  a  basin  through  a  clean  cloth,  and  leave  it  in  a  cold 
place  that  it  may  have  access  to  the  air,  that  it  may  coagulate. 
When,  laying  on  the  finger,  you  have  pressed  it,  should  the 
gluten  resist,  and  not  be  broken  by  that  pressure,  melt  it  at 
the  fire  and  pour  it  upon  the  gold,  and  work  it  very  hot,  with 
tow.  But  should  the  gluten  grow  too  thick,  admit  a  little 
water  and  work.  Should  it,  however,  be  too  soft,  so  that  it 
cannot  retain  the  impression  of  the  finger,  cook  it  better  at 
the  fire,  and  you  can  easily  soften  this  gluten  at  the  fire  and 
make  it  firm.  You  never  add  gum  to  gold  or  other  metals  : 
for  whatever,  it  being  hard,  shall  be  gummed  with  it,  quickly 
falls  off,  colours  being  excepted,  which  also  will  not  stand  well, 
unless  they  are  very  well  ground  together  and  are  very  thinly 
painted  on  the  books. 

'  From  Eraclius. 


408 


THEOPHILI  LIBER  III. 


DE  SIGNIS  INVESTIGAND^  AQUiE. 

SIGN  A  investigandae  aquae  hujusmodi  inveniuntur.  Tenuis 
juncus,  Salix  erraticus^,  Vitex,  Alnus,  Harundo,  Hedera, 
aliee  quoque  quae  sine  humore  nasci  non  possunt.  Quando  autem 
in  lacunis  similia  nascuntur  facile  his  credendum  est.  Itaque 
sic  inventiones  aquae  probabis ;  fodiatur  ergo  ubi  haec  signa  fue- 
rint  inventa  ne  minus  in  latitudinem  pedes  tres,  in  altitudinem 
quinque,  et  circa  solis  occasum,  vas  plumbum,  autem  aeneum, 
mundum,  intrinsecus  punctum,  oleo  in  unam  fossuram  inver- 
sum  collocetur,  supraque  fossuram  frondibus  vel  harundinibus 
missis  terra  inducatur.  Item  alia  die  aperiatur,  si  sudores  aut 
fistulae  inveniantur,  is  locus  sine  dubitatione  aquam  habebit. 
Item  si  vas,  ex  creta,  siccum  non  coctum,  eadem  rationepositum 
et  opertum  fuerit,  si  is  locus  aquam  habebit,  alia  die  vas  humore 
solutum  invenietur.  Vellus  lanae  similiter  in  eo  loco  positum 
si  tantum  humoris  collegerit  ut  alia  die  exprimi  possit,  mag- 
nam  copiam  aquae  locum  habere  significat.  Lucerna  plena 
oleo,  incensa  si  in  eodem  loco  similiter  adoperta,  aUa  die 
lucens  fuerit  inventa,  indicabit  eum  locum  habere  aquam, 
propterea  quod  omnis  calor  ad  se  trahit  humorem.  Item  si 
in  eodem  loco  (ignem^)  feceris  et  vaporata  terra  humidum 
nebulosumque  fumum  resuscitaverit,  et  ostendit  locum  habere 
aquam.  Cum  haec  fuerint  ita  reperta  certis  signis,  in  alti- 
tudinem putei  defodiendi  erunt,  quousque  caput  aquae  inve- 
niatur,  aut  si  plura  fuerint  in  unum  colligantur.  Maxime 
tamen  sub  radicibus  montium  in  regione  septentrionali,  signa 
aquae  sunt  quaerenda.  In  his  enim  locis  suaves  et  salubres  et 
habundantes  inveniuntur;  quando  naturae  beneficio  a  sohs 
cursu  separantur,  et  arborum  aut  montium  umbris  velatae,  fri- 
gida  gratia  aestate,  hyberno  tepida  suavitate,  profluent. 

'     erratica  " ! 

2  In  Codice,  lacuna  est,  in  hoc  loco,  quam  implevimus. 


EXPLICIT  THEOPHILUS. 


TRANSLATION. 


409 


OF  THE  SIGNS  IN  SEEKING  WATER. 

The  signs  in  tracing  water  are  found  to  be  of  this  kind. 
The  slender  rush,  the  creeping  willow,  the  hemp  tree,  the 
alder,  reed,  ivy,  and  other  (plants)  which  cannot  be  produced 
without  moisture.  Forasmuch  as  similar  things  are  produced 
in  marshes,  it  is  easy  to  have  confidence  in  these.  You  will 
likewise  try  these  devices  for  water;  the  place,  therefore, 
where  these  signs  are  found,  must  be  dug,  not  less  in  width 
than  three  feet,  in  depth  five ;  and  about  sunset,  a  clean  leaden 
or  brazen  vessel  punctured  inside  is  properly  placed,  with  oil  in 
a  hole,  and  green  leaves,  or  reeds,  being  placed  over  the 
hollow,  the  earth  is  brought  over  it.  On  another  day  it  is 
opened ;  should  moisture,  or  rills,  be  found,  this  place  will, 
without  doubt,  have  water.  If  likewise  a  dry  vase  of  chalk, 
not  burnt,  should  be  placed  and  enclosed  in  the  same  fashion, 
if  this  place  will  have  water,  the  vase  will  be  found  dissolved 
by  humidity.  Should  fleece  of  wool,  placed  likewise  in  this 
spot,  collect  so  much  moisture  that  upon  another  day  it  can 
be  expressed,  it  shews  that  the  place  will  have  a  great  plenty 
of  water.  If  a  lantern  full  of  oil  burnt  in  the  same  place, 
similarly  covered,  should  be  found  shining  upon  another  day, 
it  will  indicate  that  this  place  possesses  water,  because  all 
heat  attracts  moisture  to  itself.  Likewise,  should  you  make  a 
(fire  ^)  in  the  same  place,  and  should  the  heated  earth  raise  up 
a  moist  and  nebulous  smoke,  it  also  shews  that  the  place  pos- 
sesses water.  When  these  things  have  thus  been  found  by 
certain  signs,  the  wells  will  be  dug  out  in  depth,  until  a  source 
of  water  be  found,  or,  should  there  be  many,  they  may  be 
collected  in  one.  The  signs  of  water  are  mostly  to  be  found, 
however,  under  the  feet  of  mountains  on  the  northern  situa- 
tion. For  in  these  places  they  are  found  sweet,  salubrious 
and  abundant ;  when,  through  the  beneficence  of  nature,  they 
are  withdrawn  from  the  course  of  the  sun  and  veiled  by  the 
shadows  of  trees,  or  mountains,  they  flow  forth  with  cool 
welcome  in  summer,  with  warm  pleasantness  in  winter. 

'  There  is  here  a  void  in  the  manuscript  which  we  have  filled  up. 
END   OF  THEOPHILUS. 


ADDENDA. 


DE  TEMPERAMENTO  MINIl   ET  VERMICULI,  ET  LAZURII. 

IN  vermiculo  quarta  pars  minii  addenda  est  si  habeatur 
quorum  inde  color  ad  illuminandum  et  clarior  et  ad  regu- 
landum  facilior.  Quod  utique  diligenter  tritum  et  in  tenuis- 
simum  pulverem  redactum,  addatur  parum  aquae  et  cum  ipsa 
aliquantulum  molatur,  et  in  cornu  recolligatur,  post  laventur 
lapides  aqua  quse  in  cornu  similiter  recipiatur;  hoc  autem 
caveatur  ne  nimis  aquae  infundatar,  quando  trititur,  quod  non 
possit  cum  multa  bene  aqua  moli,  aut  colligi.  Collectum 
autem  in  cornu  cum  aqua  cornu  utique  aqua  repleto,  moveatur 
cum  ligno  et  postea  tamdiu  sinatur  requiescere,  donee  color 
separetur  ab  aqua  jacens  in  fundo  cornu,  et  tunc  demum  aqua 
leniter  ejiciatur.  Quod  cum  tota  ejecta  fuerit,  infunde  cornu 
clarum  ovi,  et  sic  exinde  poteris  operari. 

Similiter  faciendum  est  de  lazuro,  excepto  quod,  in  distem- 
perando,  tertia  pars  vini  cum  claro  adhibebis,  quod  exinde 
color  pulcrior  et  clarior  erit.  Lazur  lavandum  est  aqua  post 
decem  dies,  propter  fcetorem  suum,  vermiculum  autem  post 
mensem  duabus  vicibus,  vel  tribus;  hoc  autem  caveatur  ne 
clarum  in  lazuro  diutius  moretur. 

Eodem  modo  molendum  est  viride  de  Grecia.  Nam  viride 
terrestre  molendum  est  aqua,  et  postea  in  eo  ponitur  clarea,  sed 
tantummodo  cum  vino.  Quidam  autem  infundunt  virium  in 
vase  cupreo  et  miscent  viride  cum  vino,  deinde  reponunt  illud 
in  loco  aliquantulum  humido,  octo  diebus,  postea  exponunt 
illud  ad  calorem  solis  usque  ad  decimam  horam  diei,  et 
iterum  mittunt  in  locum  suum  ad  terram,  et  sic  cottidie  fa- 
ciunt,  donee  ad  spissitudinem  perveniat  ut  inde  scribere  valeant, 


ADDENDA. 


OF  TEMPERING  MINIUM,  VERMILION,  AND  AZURE. 

If  a  fourth  part  of  minium  is  added  to  vermilion,  a  colour  is 
procured  from  it  brighter  for  illuminating  and  easier  to  direct. 
Which  also  is  carefully  ground  and  reduced  into  the  finest 
powder,  a  little  water  may  be  added  and  it  is  ground  with  it 
a  short  time  and  is  collected  into  a  shell,  the  stones  are  after- 
wards washed  with  water,  which  is  similarly  received  into  the 
shell ;  this  must  however  be  guarded  against,  that  too  much 
water  be  not  poured  in,  because  it  cannot  be  well  ground  with 
much  water,  or  be  gathered  together.  But  being  collected  in 
the  shell  with  water,  the  shell  is  likewise  filled  with  water, 
it  must  be  stirred  with  a  stick  and  be  afterwards  left  to  rest 
until  the  colour,  lying  in  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  be  separated 
from  the  water,  and  then,  at  length,  the  water  may  be  lightly 
drawn  off.  But  when  it  shall  be  all  cast  out,  pour  the  white 
of  egg  into  the  horn,  and  so  you  can  work  with  it. 

Blue  is  to  be  similarly  treated,  excepting,  that  in  tempering, 
you  will  admit  one  third  part  of  wine  with  the  glaire,  which 
colour  will  also  be  fairer  and  brighter.  Lazur  is  to  be  washed 
in  water  after  seven  days  on  account  of  its  odour,  but  ver- 
milion after  a  month,  twice,  or  three  times ;  this  must  be 
guarded  against,  that  the  glaire  does  not  remain  too  long  with 
the  azure. 

Greek  green  is  to  be  ground  in  the  same  manner.  For 
green  earth  is  to  be  ground  in  water,  and  the  glaire  is  after- 
wards put  into  it,  but  with  wine  only.  But  some  pour  wine 
into  a  copper  vessel  and  mix  the  green  with  wine,  they  then 
leave  it  in  a  somewhat  damp  spot  for  eight  days,  they  after- 
wards expose  it  to  the  heat  of  the  sun  until  the  tenth  hour 
of  the  day,  and  they  again  lay  it  upon  the  ground,  in  its 
place,  and  thus  they  act  daily  until  it  has  arrived  at  a  solidity 
proper  for  writing;  they  then  replace  it  gently  in  a  copper  or 


412 


ADDENDA. 


et  tunc  recipiunt  illud  leniter  in  vase  cupreo  vel  vitreo,  et 
iterum  infundunt  vinum  super  feces,  et  reponunt  in  supra- 
dicto  loco,  et  sic  faciunt  per  totum  annum,  addentes  aliquan- 
tulum  de  viridi.  Qui  autem  citius  volunt  habere,  viride 
molunt  illud  cum  vino  ut  supra  dictum  est,  et  tunc  enim  inde 
scribitur  quasi  vermiculum  vel  azorium,  molendum  est  cum 
vino;  tunc  accipies  vinum  optimum  et  pone  in  aliquo  vase 
eneo  vel  cupreo  et  bullies  illud.  Quo  cocto  et  mundato  de 
spuma,  custodi  illud,  et  inde  distempera  viridem  colorem,  et 
pone  ad  tepidum  solem,  vel  lentum  (ignem  donee  spissus  sit 
mensurate,  et  posito  in  eo  de  croco  et  de  pulvere  ossis  com- 
busti,  alteram  contrahet  virorem  et  meliorem ;  vel  si  miscu- 
eris  novum  cum  veteri,  alteram  viriditatem  habebit;  vel  si 
totum  siccatum  fuerit  vel  nimis  crassum  pone  parum  de  aqua. 
Pone  prseterea  viride  in  vino  ac  frica  satis  digito :  quo  sedato, 
accipe  quod  liquidum  est  et  pone  ad  lentem  solem  vel  in  loco 
ubi  spissari  possit.  Quando  aptum  fuerit  ad  scribendum 
pone  in  vase  cupreo  vel  de  enea  et  diu  poteris  conservare  bo- 
num.  Si  nigrior  fuerit  pone  aliquantulum  saffrani  vel  de  pul- 
vere ossis  combusti.  Si  citius  vis  illuminare,  accipe  de  vitello 
ovi  crudi,  et  misce  cum  eo  viride  mellum  ^  vel  vinum,  et  cum 
hoc  liquore  mole  supra  petram  viride,  et  inde  distempera,  et 
sic  bonum  erit. 


DE  LIGNO  BRISILLO. 

LIGNUM  brisilli  cultello  raditur  in  vase  et  superfunditur 
ei  clarea  ovi.  Quo  peracto,  et  postquam  cceperit  matu- 
rescere  ponitur  in  eo  alumen  circa  mensuram  congruam,  hoc 
brisillum  postquam  maturatum  fuerit,  emitendum  est  liquor  et 
in  conca  alia  reservandus.  Quo  facto,  iterum  ponenda  est 
clarea  in  eodem  brisillo,  et  postquam  maturata  fuerit  extra- 
henda  est.  Quod  tamdiu  fiat  quamdiu  brisillum  claram  illam 
incoloraverit :  hoc  autem  cave,  ne  bris.  sine  alumine  dis- 
temperes  aUoquin  a  pergameno  totum  bris.  paulatim  de- 

*  "  ignem,"  supposita  est.  ^  "  mellinam  "  jw.  ? 


TRANSLATION. 


413 


glass  vase,  and  again  pour  wine  over  the  sediment,  and  place 
it  again  in  the  above  mentioned  place,  and  they  do  this  the 
whole  year,  adding  a  portion  of  green.  Those,  however, 
who  wish  to  procure  it  sooner,  grind  this  green  with  wine 
as  directed  above,  and  then  it  is  used  for  writing  as  vermilion, 
or  azure,  it  is  ground  with  wine ;  you  then  take  the  best  wine 
and  put  it  into  any  brass  or  copper  vessel,  and  you  boil  it. 
This  being  cooked  and  cleansed  from  froth,  keep  it  and 
temper  the  green  colour  with  it  and  place  it  in  the  warmth  of 
the  sun,  or  a  slow  fire,  until  it  has  become  moderately  thick, 
and  putting  yellow  and  the  powder  of  calcined  bones  into  it, 
it  contracts  yet  more,  and  better,  green ;  or  if  you  mix  new 
with  the  old,  it  will  possess  another  green  colour ;  should  it 
have  become  quite  or  nearly  dry,  add  a  little  water.  More- 
over, place  the  green  in  wine  and  rub  it  well  with  the  finger: 
this  having  settled,  take  the  liquid  portion  and  put  it  in  the 
mild  sunshine,  or  in  a  place  where  it  can  become  inspissated. 
When  it  has  become  fit  for  painting,  place  it  in  a  copper  or 
brass  vessel,  and  you  can  keep  it  good  for  a  long  time. 
Should  it  become  darker,  put  to  it  a  little  saffron  or  powder 
of  calcined  bones.  Should  you  wish  to  illuminate  more 
speedily,  take  the  yolk  of  a  fresh  egg  and  mix  mead  or  wine 
with  the  green,  and  with  this  liquor  grind  the  green  upon  a 
stone,  and  temper  with  it,  and  it  will  thus  be  good. 


OF  BRISIL  WOOD. 

Brisil  wood  is  scraped  with  a  knife  into  a  vase,  and  white  of 
egg  is  poured  over  it.  This  being  done,  and  after  it  has  com- 
menced to  mature,  alum  is  put  into  it,  about  the  proper 
measure;  after  this  brisil  has  become  matured  the  liquor  is 
withdrawn  and  kept  in  another  vessel.  This  done,  glaire 
is  again  to  be  placed  upon  the  same  brisil,  and  it  is  to  be 
withdrawn  after  it  has  become  matured.  This  is  done  as  long 
as  the  brisil  shall  colour  the  glaire  :  beware  of  this,  however, 
that  you  do  not  temper  brisil  without  alum,  otherwise  all  the 
brisil  fades  from  the  parchment,  and  the  glaire  alone  will  re- 


414 


ADDENDA. 


cidet  et  sola  clara  remanebit.  Igitur  quotiens  bris.  tuum 
volueris  facere  rubeum,  quod  solet  facile  discolorari  et  spisses- 
cere,  impone  alumen  et  sic  meliorabitur,  et  renovabitur  ssepe 
clarea  cum  spissum  fuerit.  In  bris.  si  misceas  album,  fiet 
roseus  color.    Si  misceas  azurum,  fiet  purpureas. 


DE  SINOPLO. 

SINOPLUM  eodem  modo  moles  quo  vermiculum.  In  eo 
miscere  poteris  parum  albi  et  erit  roseus  color.  Item 
si  misceas  cum  albo  parum  sinopli  erit  carmineus  color :  aut 
iterum  si  misceas  cum  sinoplo  auripigmentum,  vincente  auri- 
pigmento,  erit  rufus  color. 


DE  BRISILLO. 

FRAGMENTUM  brisilli  pones  in  vasculo  ferreo  vel  eneo, 
et  etiam  cortice  ovi,  cum  aqua,  et  fac  bullire  lente  donee 
aliquantulum  sit  decorata ;  et  refrigerata  modicum,  deinde 
pone  ahimen  bonum,  temperate  quia  bene  salsasum  velles 
illud,  postea  calefac  modicum  movendo  omnia.  Refrigerate, 
eo  pone  clarum  ovi  et  dimitte  donee  maturum  sit  post  duae 
vel  tres  dies.  Quod  si  nimis  clarum  est  pone  ubi  possit 
spissari,  non  tamen  ad  solem,  et  sic  meliorabitur.  Pone  et 
fragmentum  brisilli  bene  minutum  in  clarea  forti,  et  post 
duse  vel  tres  donee  sit  maturatum.  Pastellum  quoque 
poteris  distemperare  seeunda  vel  tertia  vice,  sed  cave  ne 
totum  siccatum  sit.  Azur  terrestre  mole  super  petram  cum 
aqua,  movendo  digito  et  apponendo  aqua,  ut  possit  per  pan- 
num  transire  postea  cola  per  pannum  delieatum  ut  mundior 
sit.  Quo  purificato  et  exsiccato,  pone  claream  fortem ;  pos- 
tea accipe  de  vitello  ovi  crudi  et  misce  cum  aqua  et  vino 
aequaliter,  et  valde  pone  parum  in  colore,  et  faeiat  melius  de 


TRANSLATION. 


415 


main.  Therefore,  as  often  as  you  wish  to  make  your  red 
brisil,  which  is  accustomed  to  become  discoloured  and  to 
thicken,  put  in  some  alum,  and  so  it  will  be  improved  and, 
when  become  thick  with  the  glaire,  will  often  be  renewed. 
If  you  mix  white  with  brisil  it  will  make  a  rose  colour.  If 
you  mix  blue,  it  will  make  purple. 


OF  SINOPER. 

You  grind  sinoper  in  the  same  manner  as  vermihon.  You 
can  mix  a  little  white  with  that,  and  it  will  be  a  rosy  colour. 
Also  if  you  mix  a  little  sinoper  with  white  it  will  be  a  car- 
mine colour :  or,  again,  if  you  mix  orpiment  with  sinoper, 
the  orpiment  being  overcome,  it  will  be  a  red  colour. 


OF  BRISIL. 

You  place  the  shred  of  brisil  in  a  small  iron  or  brass  vessel 
with,  also,  the  shell  of  an  egg,  and  cause  it  to  boil  gently, 
until  it  has  become  somewhat  stained  with  colour ;  and  being 
a  little  cooled,  put  some  good  alum  into  it,  temper  it  as  you 
wish  it  well  seasoned,  afterwards  warm  it  a  little,  stirring 
all  the  things.  Being  cold,  put  glaire  of  egg  in  it  and 
leave  it  until,  after  two  or  three  days,  it  has  become  ma- 
tured. But  should  it  be  too  clear,  place  it  where  it  can  be- 
come thick,  not  in  the  sun,  however,  and  so  it  will  be  im- 
proved. Also  put  the  shred  of  brisil,  very  fine,  into  strong 
glaire,  and  after  two  or  three  (days)  it  will  become  matured. 
You  can  likewise  temper  woad  a  second  or  third  time,  but 
beware  that  it  do  not  become  quite  dry.  Grind  blue  earth 
upon  a  stone  with  water,  stirring  it  with  the  finger  and  apply- 
ing water,  that  it  may  pass  through  a  cloth,  afterwards  strain 
it  through  a  delicate  cloth,  that  it  may  be  cleaner.  This  being 
purified  and  dried,  put  to  it  some  strong  glaire ;  afterwards 
take  yolk  of  fresh  egg  and  mix  it  with  water  and  wine  in  equal 
parts,  and  put  very  little  into  the  colour,  and  it  will  make  it 
flow  better  from  the  pen.    This  is  likewise  serviceable  for  all 


416 


ADDENDA. 


penna  exire.  Quod  utique  ad  omnes  colores  valet,  et  si  ni- 
grior  fuerit,  bis  vel  ter  lavabis  aqua,  vel  et  amplius,  et  sic  me- 
liorabitur  per  duse  vel  tres  dies,  potes  in  eo  dimittere  claream, 
sed  quara  saepius  mutabis  tanto  melior  erit.  Potes  quoque 
distemperare  azur  albugine,  fricando  digito  in  vasculo,  donee 
satis  sit,  et  postea  lavabis  cum  aqua,  et  eo  siccato  pone  cla- 
ream puram,  et  post  duse  vel  tres  dies  iterum  lavabis  pro  ovo 
inveterato  et  nigro  facto,  et  dimitte  donee  siccatum  sit  propter 
huraorem  aquae. 


DE  TEMPERAMENTO  COLORUM  ^ 

AZURIUM  Saracenorum  bonum  est.  Item  aliud  azurium 
Romanum,  et  aliud  dicitur  indium  :  viride  Graecum, 
viride  terrestre,  vermiculum,  minium,  album  de  Apulia,  album 
de  ossibus,  et  album  de  plumbo,  brisillum,  auripigmentum, 
ocrum,  safranum,  sinoplum,  gorma,  distemperatio  bruni, 
gipsum,  foliolum. 

In  azur.  Romano  potest  misceri  album  de  Apulia.  Item  po- 
test misceri  auripigmenti  et  est  viride  croceum.  Item  si  ponas 
brisil  erit  purpura.  Item  si  ponas  vermiculum  erit  brunum. 
Viride  de  graecia  potest  misceri  cum  albo  de  Apulia  utroque 
cum  vino  temperato,  autem  utro  illorum  cum  ovo,  et  sic  fiet 
album  viride.  Item  si  ponas  in  viridi  safranum,  erit  viride 
croceum,  ita  tamen  si  cum  vino  safranum  fuerit  distemperatum 
adde  et  si  vis  album.  Eodem  modo  de  viridi  terrestri  ex- 
cepto  quod  molitur  cum  aqua,  et  postea  ponitur  in  ea  el  area. 
In  vermiculo  si  misceas  album  fiet  carminum.  Si  misceas 
azur  romanum  erit  brunum.  Album  de  Apulia  potest  misceri 
cum  azuro  solo,  et  iterum  cum  azuro  et  brisillo,  et  iterum 
cum  azuro  romano,  necnon  et  potest  misceri  cum  viridi  ter- 
restri. Album  de  ossibus  cum  auripigmento  potest  misceri, 
quae  mixtura  de  alio  fieri  non  potest,  quod  utique  album 
tantum  pictoribus  est  necessarium.     Auripigmentum  cum 

'  "  ab  Eraclio  excerpto." 


TRANSLATION. 


417 


colours,  and  should  it  become  darker,  you  will  wash  it  twice 
or  thrice  with  water,  or  even  more,  and  so  it  will  be  improved 
in  two  or  three  days,  you  can  allow  the  glaire  to  remain ;  but 
the  more  often  you  shall  change  it  the  better  it  will  be.  You 
can  likewise  temper  azure  with  white  of  egg,  by  rubbing  with 
the  finger  in  a  small  vessel  until  sufficient,  and  you  will 
afterwards  wash  it  with  water,  and  being  dry  you  put  pure 
glaire  to  it,  and  you  will  again  wash  it  after  two  or  three 
days,  on  account  of  the  stale  egg  turning  it  black,  and  spread 
it  until  it  has  become  dry,  because  of  the  moisture  from  the 
water. 


OF  THE  TEMPERING  OF  COLOURS. 

The  "  blue  of  the  Saracens  "  is  good.  Also  another  "  Ro- 
man blue,"  and  another  called  "  indigo."  Greek  green, 
green  earth,  vermihon,  minium,  white  of  Apulia,  bone  white, 
and  white  lead,  brisil,  orpiment,  ochre,  saffron,  sinoper,  the 
preparation  of  brunus,  gypsum,  folium. 

Roman  azure  can  be  mixed  with  white  of  Apulia :  it  can 
likewise  be  put  to  orpiment,  and  it  forms  a  yellow  green. 
Likewise,  if  you  put  brisil  to  it,  it  will  be  purple  :  also,  if  you 
put  vermilion  it  will  be  "brunus."  Greek  green  can  be 
mixed  with  white  of  Apulia,  both  tempered  with  wine,  and 
both  of  them  with  egg,  and  thus  a  whitish  green  will  be 
made :  also,  if  you  put  saffron  into  green  it  will  be  a  green- 
ish yellow,  however,  if  the  saffron  be  tempered  with  wine, 
add  white  if  you  wish  it.  Green  earth,  after  the  same 
manner,  excepting  that  it  is  ground  with  water,  and  glaire  is 
afterwards  placed  in  it. 

In  vermilion,  should  you  mix  white,  it  will  make  carmine  ; 
if  you  mix  Roman  blue  it  will  be  brunus  :  white  of  Apuha  can 
be  mixed  with  blue  alone,  and  again  with  blue  and  brisil,  and 
again  with  Roman  azure ;  it  can  also  be  mixed  with  green 
earth.  Bone  white  can  be  mixed  with  orpiment,  which 
mixture  cannot  otherwise  be  made,  this  white  is  therefore 
necessary  to  painters. 

E  E 


418 


ADDENDA. 


magno  labore  trititur,  et  idcirco,  more  piperis,  terendum  est 
in  mortario,  vel,  si  illud  non  habes,  involuntum  in  corio, 
deinde  in  marmore  cum  aqua  sicut  cseteri  colores.  In  cujus 
temperamento  accipe  duse  partes  ipsius,  et  tertiam  de  vitello 
ovi  crudi,  et  pulveris  ossis  combusti  plus,  insimul  commixti, 
et  simul  misce;  omnes  enim  colores  moluntur  cum  aqua,  qua  ex- 
haustaet  diligenter  ejecta,  ponitur  in  eis  clarea,  prseterin  viridi 
de  Grsecia.  Ocrum  moliter  cum  aqua,  sed  non  est  necesse 
nisi  pictoribus  murorum,  et  in  opere  litterarum  aurearum. 
Safranum  potest  distemperari  cum  clarea  ovi,  vel  cum  vino, 
et  fit  rufus  color,  sic  ut  brisillo  misceii  possit.  Colores  in 
pergameno  clari  et  spissi  hi  sunt,  Vermiculum.  Auripig- 
mentum,  Viride  grsecum.  Sanguis  Draconis,  Gravetum.  In- 
dicum,  Carminum,  Crocus,  Folium,  Brunum,  Minium,  Album, 
Nigrum,  optimum  ex  carbonibus  vitis  cum  ovo  sicut  alii  co- 
lores. 


DE  MIXTURA  COLORUM.  ^ 

AZURIUM  incides  de  nigro,  maptizabis  auripigmento. 
Item  misce  cum  albo  plumbo,  incides  de  azur,  map- 
tizabis de  albo  plumbo.  Vermiculum  incides  de  bruno,  map- 
tiza  auripigmento.  Item  misce  vermiculum  cum  albo  plumbo, 
et  fac  colorem  quod  dicitur  rosa,  incides  de  vermiculo,  map- 
tiza  de  albo  plumbo.  Auripigmentum  incides  de  vermiculo, 
et  illi  maptizabatura  non  est,  quod  deturpat  alios  colores. 
Tamen  si  vis  facere  clarum  videre,  auripigmentum  misce  cum 
indico,  incide  de  nigro,  maptiza  auripigmento.  Sanguis  dra- 
conis  incides  nigro,  maptiza  albo  plumbo.  Item  misce  san- 
guis draconis  cum  auripigmento,  incides  de  nigro,  maptiza  de 
albo  plumbo.  Viride  incides  de  nigro,  maptiza  de  apulia. 
Item  misce  viride  cum  albo,  incides  de  viridi  maptiza  albo 
plumbo.    Item  misce  gravetum  cum  albo  plumbo,  incides  de 

^  ab  Eraclio  excerpto. 


TRANSLATION. 


419 


Orpirnent  is  ground  with  great  labour,  and  is  therefore  to 
be  ground  in  a  mortar  like  pepper,  or,  should  you  not  have 
this,  rolled  in  a  skin,  then  upon  the  marble  with  water,  as  the 
other  colours.  In  the  tempering  of  this,  take  two  parts  of  it, 
and  a  third  (part)  of  yolk  of  fresh  egg,  and  more  of  the 
powder  of  calcined  bones,  mixed  together;  all  colours  arc 
ground  with  water,  which  being  withdrawn  and  carefully 
taken  out,  glaire  is  put  into  them,  except  in  Greek  green. 

Ochre  is  ground  with  water,  but  it  is  not  necessary  un- 
less to  painters  upon  walls  and  in  gold  work  of  letters. 

Saffron  can  be  tempered  with  glaire  of  egg,  or  with  wine, 
and  a  red  colour  is  made,  so  that  it  can  be  mixed  with  brisil. 

The  bright  and  thick  colours  for  parchment  are  these.  Ver- 
milion, Orpiment,  Greek  green.  Dragon's  blood,  Gravetum, 
Indigo,  Carmine,  Saffron,  Folium,  Brunum,  Minium,  White, 
Black,  the  best  from  vine  charcoal,  (tempered)  with  egg,  as 
the  other  colours. 


OF  THE  MIXTURE  OF  COLOURS. 

You  break  blue  with  black,  you  will  design  with  orpiment. 
Also  mix  it  with  white  lead,  break  it  with  blue,  design  with 
white  lead.  Break  vermilion  with  brunum,  design  with  orpi- 
ment :  also  mix  vermilion  with  white  lead  and  make  the 
colour  called  rose,  break  it  with  vermilion,  design  with  white 
lead.  Break  orpiment  with  vermiHon,  and  there  is  no  rehef 
to  it,  because  it  would  debase  the  other  colours.  However, 
should  you  wish  to  make  it  appear  bright,  mix  the  orpiment 
with  indigo,  break  it  with  black,  design  with  orpiment. 
Break  dragon's  blood  with  black,  design  with  white  lead  : 
likewise  mix  dragon's  blood  with  orpiment,  break  with  black, 
design  with  white  lead.  Break  green  with  black,  design 
with  Apulia:  likewise  mix  green  with  white,  break  with  green, 
design  with  white  lead.  Mix,  also,  "  gravetus  "  with  white 
lead,  break  with  gravetus,  design  with  white  lead. 

E  E  2 


420 


ADDENDA. 


graveto  niaptiza  albo  plumbo.  Indicum  incides  de  azurio^ 
maptiza  de  albo  plumbo.  Item  misce  indicum  cum  albo 
plumbo,  incides  de  indico,  maptiza  de  albo  plumbo.  Crocum 
incides  de  vermiculo,  maptiza  de  albo  plumbo.  Item  misce 
crocum  cum  albo  plumbo,  incides  de  croco,  maptiza  de  albo 
plumbo.  Folium  incides  de  nigro,  maptiza  de  albo  plumbo. 
Item  misce  folium  cum  albo  plumbo. 


SI  VIS  FACERE  LITERAS  AUREAS  VEL  ARGENTEAS  VEL 
CUPREAS  VEL  EREAS  AUT  FERREAS. 

ACCIPE  limam  et  metallum  illud  et  limando  fac  pulverem. 
Postea  accipe  gummam  prunariam  et  pones  eam  in 
aceto,  dimitte  per  diem  et  noctem  et  postea  extrahe  foras  et 
mitte  eam  in  aquam  claram  aliquantulum  tepidam  et  ibi  di- 
mitte per  diem  et  noctem.  Postea  accipe  gummam  et  lima- 
turam  et  mole  super  petram  fortiter,  et  distempera  cum  aqua, 
in  qua  distemperatus  est  pulvis  ille,  tantum  ut  bene  possis 
scribere.  Si  non  habes  gummam  accipe  moniacam  et  distem- 
pera cum  aqua  calida,  in  qua  moniacam  dimittes  per  medium 
diem.  Postea  distempera  ut  dictum  est  utrinque,  et  fac 
literas  quas  volueris.  Quas  utique  siccatas  polies  leviter  cum 
dente  lupi  vel  canis,  et  hujusmodi  aut  cum  lapide  polito,  vel 
adamantino. 


SI  VIS  FACERE  VERMICULUM  BONUM. 

ACCIPE  ampullam  vitream  et  lini  eam  de  foris  de  luto, 
vel  argillosa  terra  et  pone  in  earn  dua  pondera  sulfuris 
albi,  vel  crocei  coloris,  et  unum  pondus  argenti  vivi  et  pone 
super  duas  petras  et  tunc  appone  ignum  lentissimum.  Tamen 
cooperias  operculos  ampullse  de  parva  tegula  vel  petra  et 
quamdiu  videris  fumum  rubeum  quasi  vermiculum,  sic  tolle 
ab  igne,  et  habebis  vermiculum  bonum. 


TRANSLATION. 


421 


Break  indigo  with  azure,  design  with  white  lead  :  also  mix 
indigo  with  white  lead,  break  with  indigo,  design  with  white 
lead.  Break  saffron  with  vermilion,  design  with  white  lead  : 
also  mix  saffron  with  white  lead,  break  with  saffron,  design 
with  white  lead.  Break  folium  with  black,  design  with  white 
lead  :  also  mix  folium  with  white  lead. 


OF  MAKING  GOLD,  SILVER,  COPPER,  BRASS,  OR  IRON 
LETTERS. 

Take  a  file  and  that  metal  (you  may  choose)  and  make 
a  powder  by  filing.  Afterwards  take  the  gum  of  the  plum-tree 
and  put  it  into  acid,  leave  it  for  a  day  and  night  and  after- 
wards take  it  out  and  put  it  into  clear  water,  somewhat  warm, 
and  leave  it  there  a  day  and  night.  Afterwards  take  the  gum 
and  filings  and  grind  them  strongly  upon  a  stone,  and  temper 
with  water,  with  which  this  powder  is  to  be  so  tempered  that 
you  may  be  able  to  write.  If  you  have  no  gum,  take  gum 
ammoniac  and  temper  it  with  hot  water,  in  which  you  leave 
this  ammoniac  half  a  day.  Afterwards  temper  both  as  above 
and  make  the  letters  which  you  wish.  These  likewise  dry, 
you  pohsh  them  gently  with  a  wolf's  tooth,  or  that  of  a  dog, 
and  in  this  manner  either  with  a  polished  stone,  or  adamant. 


OF  MAKING  GOOD  VERMILION. 

Take  a  glass  bottle  and  line  it  outside  with  lute  or  argilla- 
ceous earth  and  place  in  it  two  parts  weight  of  white  or 
yellow  sulphur,  and  one  part  weight  of  quicksilver  and  place 
it  over  two  stones  and  then  apply  a  very  gentle  fire.  And 
you  cover  the  mouth  of  the  bottle  with  small  pieces  of  tile,  or 
stones,  and  when  you  see  a  red  smoke  like  vermilion  so  take 
it  from  the  tire  and  you  will  have  good  vermilion. 


r 


422  ADDENDA. 


SI  VIS  FACERE  AZURIUM  OPTIMUM. 

A  CCIPE  ollam  novam  et  mitte  in  ea  laminas  purissimi 
argenti  quantas  volueris,  et  pone  illam  ollam  in  vinde- 
miam  quse  est  projecta  de  torculari  sive  de  tina,  et  cooperi 
ollam  cum  laminis  de  ipsa  vindemia  et  serva  diligenter  usque 
ad  XV.  dies,  et  sic  aperies  ollam  illam,  et  siccata  quod  est  in 
laminis  rade  in  mundissimo  vase.  Quod  si  amplius  volueris 
fac  iterum  similiter. 


SI   VIS  ALIUM  AZURIUM  FACERE. 

ACCIPE  ampullam  de  purissimo  cupro  et  imple  fortissimo 
aceto,  et  cooperi  diligenter  os  ejus,  ne  aliquid  humoris 
vel  vaporis  possit  exire,  addens  et  si  necesse  est  ad  hoc  te- 
nacem  terram  vel  pastam ;  et  ipsam  ampullam  ita  clausam 
pone  in  aliquo  calido  loco  aut  in  terram,  aut  in  foenum  pro- 
jectum  de  stabulo,  et  sic  dimitte  per  unum  mensem,  et  tunc 
aperi  illam  ampullam,  et  quod  inveneris  in  ea  dimitte  ad  solem 
siccare. 


FINIS. 


TRANSLATION. 


423 


OF  MAKING  THE  BEST  AZURE. 

Take  a  new  pot  and  place  leaves  of  the  purest  silver  in  it,  as 
many  as  you  please,  and  place  this  pot  in  the  grape  pressings 
which  are  thrown  from  the  press  or  vat,  and  cover  the  pot 
with  layers  of  this  grape  refuse  and  keep  it  carefully  until  the 
fifteenth  day,  and  so  open  the  pot,  and  scrape  whatever  has 
dried  upon  the  leaves  into  a  very  clean  vessel.  Should  you 
wish  for  more,  act  again  in  a  similar  manner. 


OF  MAKING  OTHER  AZURE. 

Take  a  small  vase  of  the  purest  copper  and  fill  it  with  the 
strongest  vinegar,  and  cover  its  mouth  carefully,  lest  any 
humidity  or  vapour  may  escape,  adding  to  this,  should  it  be 
necessary,  a  tenacious  earth,  or  lute ;  and  place  this  jar  thus 
closed  in  some  warm  place,  or  in  the  ground,  or  in  the  litter 
thrown  from  the  stable,  and  so  leave  it  for  one  month,  and 
then  open  this  jar  and  expose  what  you  may  have  found  in  it 
to  dry,  in  the  sun. 


FINIS. 


NOTES   TO   BOOK  III. 


CHAPTERS  XVIII.  AND  XIX. 

The  reader  will  probably  remark  the  expedient  to  furnish  carbon 
during  the  process  of  tempering  iron  or  steel,  by  the  burnt  bone  of 
the  ox,  or  the  skin  with  animal  fat.  The  knowledge  of  tempering 
iron  or  steel  appears  to  be  very  ancient,  as  in  Proverbs,  xxvii.  17, 
"Iron  sharpeneth  iron,"  would  indicate. 

C.  XXIII. 

The  expressions  very  pure  gold  and  silver,"  "  purest  gold," 
found  in  Scripture,  warrant  us  in  the  belief  that  cupellation  is  a 
process  of  very  ancient  date.  "  Take  away  the  dross  from  the 
silver,  and  there  shall  come  forth  a  vessel  for  the  finer." ^  "As 
the  fining  pot  for  silver  and  the  furnace  for  gold  :  so  is  a  man  to 
his  praise."  ^ 

The  ancients  knew  that  gold  and  silver  were  rarely  found  in  a 
state  of  purity  ;  the  "  %^i^c-of  ocirv^oq "  of  the  Greeks  was  the  Arabian 
gold  of  the  xlvii.  chapter  of  Theophilus^ ;  the  gold  which  had  been 
purified  by  cupellation  was  called  "  o/3pt;c7ov,"  — "  aurum  obryzum," 
or  "  ad  obrussam  "  of  Pliny.  The  ancients  were  also  in  the  prac- 
tice of  employing  lead  for  purifying  gold  and  silver.  "  They  add 
a  proportion  of  lead,  according  to  the  quantity  of  gold." 

It  would  perhaps  be  well,  in  this  place,  to  inquire  whether  the 
ancients  were  ignorant  of  the  action  of  the  mineral  acids,  or  the 

'  Proverbs,  xxv.  4. 
'  lb.  xxvii,  21. 

Diodorus  SicLilus,  II.  161.  Vol.  1. 
^  Id.  ex,  Agatborchide.  Ill,  p,  183. 


426 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


mixture  of  substances  capable  of  combining,  so  as  to  produce  them 
during  the  process  of  refining  the  precious  metals,  and  therefore 
whether  they  were  not  accustomed  to  separate  gold  from  silver,  or 
other  alloy,  through  the  action  of  these  acids,  which,  attacking  the 
foreign  matters  contained  by  the  ore,  left  the  gold  pure. 

The  process,  described  by  Theophrastus,  which  was  employed 
in  order  to  procure  quicksilver  from  native  cinnabar  by  rubbing 
the  ore  in  a  brass  mortar,  with  a  brass  pestle,  with  ofo$,  has 
been  remarked,  p.  56.  Theophrastus  adds,  "And  many  other 
things  of  this  kind  other  persons,  perhaps,  may  attain."^ 

Pliny  is  more  explicit,  or  rather  the  science  had  advanced  since 
the  Greek  had  written,  and  the  prediction  of  Theophrastus  had 
apparently  been  fulfilled. 

In  the  chapter  upon  gold,  L.  33.  C.  4,  Pliny  hands  down  this 
remarkable  sentence. 

"  Torretur  etiam  cum  salis  grumo,  pondere  triplici  misto,  et  rur- 
sum  cum  duabus  salis  portionibus,  et  una  lapidis,  quem  schiston 
vocant :  ita  virus  tradit  rebus  una  crematis  in  fictili  vase,  ipsum 
purum  et  incorruptum." 

It  is  also  calcined  with  salt  grumus,  mixed  in  threefold  weight, 
and  again  with  two  portions  of  salt  and  one  of  a  stone  which  they 
call  schistus  :  thus,  the  substances  being  burned  together  in  an 
earthen  vessel,  the  bitterness  yields  it  pure  and  uncorrupted." 

Should  the  "  sal  grumus"^  be  the  sulphate  of  potash,  (Glauber's 
salt,)  this,  with  the  schiston,  acting  upon  the  common  salt  (muriate 
of  soda,)  with  the  presence  of  water,  yielded  by  the  salts  and  alu- 
mine,  would,  under  the  action  of  heat,  yield  a  muriatic  or  hydro- 
chloric acid,  called  in  after  times  *Hhe  spirit  of  salt,"  the  gold  would 
be  liberated,  the  sulphur  combining  with  the  soda,  alumina,  &c. 

The  schiston  was  of  many  kinds,  one  a  sort  of  haematite,  another 
of  anthracite,  but  a  third  a  species  of  calcanthus,  or  sulphurous 
copper  ore,  from  which  a  schiston  was  made,  called  by  Pliny  a 
concrete  alum — this  is  no  other  than  our  chrystallized  sulphate 
of  copper  ^. 

Geber  has  the  credit  of  the  invention  of  the  mineral  acids,  yet 
he  writes  as  if  he  were  not  the  inventor,  but  rather  the  compiler  of 

'  Theophrastus  on  Stones.  C.  105.    "Ta^sv  ovv  roia.ura  to,^  'avris  Xeifioi  vXuu." 

'  Glumen  rotundundum,  et  salvandum  quod  sal  Gemma  vocatur,  et  calcanthum 
ex  aceto  acerrino  terunter  in  sereo  mortario,  &c.  "  Eraclius,"  vide  Raspe,  p.  116. 
Thus  grumus  or  glumen  is  not  "sal  gemma"  (muriate  of  soda). 

>  Compare  Pliny.    L.  35.  C.  15.  with  L.  34.  C.  12. 


NOTES  TO   BOOK  III. 


427 


the  processes  he  indicates,  and  it  is  probable  that  he,  as  well  as  the 
other  Arabian  authors,  drew  largely  from  Greek  sources  of  inform- 
ation, now  lost  to  us. 

Geber  directs  a  mixture  of  1  ft  of  vitriol  of  Cyprus^  1^  ft  of 
saltpetre,  and  a  quarter  of  alum  of  Jameni,  to  be  submitted  to  dis- 
tillation in  order  to  procure  a  liquid  of  great  solvent  power  ^  He 
adds  that  if  you  supply  a  quarter  of  sal  ammoniac  to  this  it  will 
dissolve  gokP.  The  vitriol  of  Cyprus  is  a  sulphate  of  copper;  the 
nitrate  of  potash  and  muriate  of  ammonia  (sal  ammoniac)  reacting 
upon  each  other  form  the  "  aqua  regia,"  or  mixture  of  nitric  and 
hydrochloric  acid,  the  sulphuric  acid  combining  with  the  salifiable 
bases. 

In  c.  xxxiii.  Theophilus  directs  that  the  uric  salts  and  common 
salt  be  mixed  with  clay  for  the  purpose  of  purifying  gold. 

C.  XXIV.    MARCA,  NUMMUS. 

The  Marc  contained  eight  ounces — "  octo  unciae  faciunt  raarcam." 
(Skenoeus,  de  ponderibus  et  mensuris.) 

The  NuMMUs  varied,  there  were  nummi  of  copper,  the  penny 
— of  silver,  the  denarius,  ten  pence — of  gold,  twenty-five  denarii. 

In  weight  the  nummus  was  sometimes  the  fourth  part  of  the 
silver  denarius ;  sometimes  it  is  placed  for  the  drachma,  or  ^th  of 
a  Roman  ounce. 

C.  XXVI.  "  DEXTER,  SIGNANS." 

The  *'  guide  of  painting,"  'E^iJi,nvla  t^j?  I^wy^a'^ni^:;,  from  Mount 
Athos,  describes  the  manner  of  representing  this  emblem,  so  fre- 
quently found  in  the  decorations  of  both  Greek  and  Roman 
churches  ;  but  the  mode  of  expressing  the  benediction  differed 
with  the  sects. 

"  When  you  would  represent  the  hand  giving  benediction  do 
not  join  three  fingers  together,  but  cross  the  thumb  with  the  fourth 
finger,  so  that  the  second,  called  the  index,  remaining  straight, 
and  the  third  being  a  little  bent,  they  form  together  the  name  of 

'  Nitric  acid. 

'  Geber  de  Alchem.  Norimb.    1545.    G.  xxiii. 


428 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


Jesus  (IHCOYC),  IC.  In  effect  the  second  finger,  remaining  open, 
indicates  I  (iota),  and  the  third  forms,  by  the  curve,  a  C  (sigma). 
The  thumb  is  placed  across  the  fourth  finger ;  the  fifth  is  likewise 
a  little  bent,  which  forms  an  indication  of  the  word  (XPICTOC)  XC  ; 
for  the  meeting  of  the  thumb  and  the  fourth  finger  forms  a  X 
(chi),  and  the  little  finger  forms,  by  its  curve,  a  C  (sigma).  These 
two  letters  are  the  abridgment  of  Christos.  Thus,  through  the 
divine  providence  of  the  Creator,"  continues  the  monk,  **  the 
fingers  of  the  hand  of  man,  be  they  more  or  less  long,  are  arranged 
to  be  so  as  able  to  design  the  name  of  Christ."^ 

*'  The  western  Church,"  writes  M.  Didron,  "is  less  mystic.  The 
benediction  is  made  in  opening  the  three  first  fingers  of  the  right 
hand,  and  in  keeping  the  annulary  and  the  little  finger  shut.  It 
is  true  that  certain  liturgists,  Guillaume  Durand,  amongst  others, 
say  (Rationale  divinorum  offic.  1.  v.  c.  2.)  that  "  this  mode  of  bless- 
ing recalls  the  Trinity," 

'*  In  the  church  of  Mount  Hymettus,  the  Father  blesses  by 
opening  only  the  great  finger  and  index  ;  but  this  may  be  an  error, 
and  I,  perhaps,  imperfectly  saw  it.  It  is  possible  that  a  Greek 
benediction  may  be  met  with  amongst  us  ;  such  a  fact  should  be 
established  with  the  utmost  care,  as  incontestably  proving  a  By- 
zantine influence.  M.  Aymard  has  found,  in  the  cathedral  at 
Puy,  a  hand  blessing  in  the  Greek  manner.  "  This  church,"  says 
M.  Didron,  "  is  vaulted  with  cupolas,  as  a  Byzantine  church,  and 
proves  that  the  ancient  churches  with  cupolas  are  really  Byzan- 
tine, although  not  the  only  ones." 

C.  XXVIII.  DE  NIGELLO. 

The  beauty  of  the  chalice,  designed  by  Theophilus,  will  not 
escape  the  attention  of  the  artist,  nor  will  the  value  of  the  recom- 
mendation to  "  carve  with  a  bold  stroke "  in  the  preparation  of 
the  ground  for  the  "  niello  "  be  lost.  The  value  of  this  and  the 
26th  chapters  will  be  seen  by  those  who  will  take  the  trouble  to 
compare  them  with  the  readings  of  all  other  copies  of  the  MS. 
of  Theophilus. 

The  Roman  casket  of  silver,  enriched  with  niello,  found  at 
Rome  in  a  ruin  near  the  Esquiline  gate,  and  which  was  of  the  4th 

'  Manuel  dlconograpliie  Chretiennc.    Gr.  et  Lat.    Paris,  Didron  et  Du- 

rand. 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


429 


or  5th  century,  proves  the  antiquity  of  this  species  of  ornament. 
This  casket  contained  the  utensils  necessary  to  the  toilet  of  a 
Roman  lady,  and  bore  an  inscription  to  the  effect  that  it  was  given 
by  Turcius  secundus  to  Projecta,  his  wife.  See  M.  Visconti. 
"Lettera  su  di  una  antica  argentaria,"  &c. — Roma,  1793^ 

C.  XXIX. 

'*  Take  the  gum  which  is  called  parahas,  or  barabas." 

In  the  manuscripts  of  the  13th  and  14th  centuries  the  chrystal- 
lized  salts  are  sometimes  called  gummi.  The  chrystallized  urates 
are  called  by  Paracelsus  '*  Barnabas,  or  Barnaas,"  which  he  de- 
scribes as  the  "  sal  petrse  urinarius  ;  urina  salis  petrse." 

Barach,  borak  or  borax,  the  native  borate  of  soda,  began 
through  the  Arab  chemists,  or  alchemists,  to  be  distinguished  in 
the  arts  from  the  9th  century. 

The  Montpellier  MS.,  already  quoted  in  the  notes  to  L.  1,  gives 
the  composition  of  nigellum  which  is  to  be  used  with  *'  boraxa  " 
as  a  flux;  the  composition  of  the  niello  is  from  silver,  copper,  sul- 
phur, and  lead ;  the  same  materials,  although  in  different  propor- 
tions, as  those  of  Theophilus,  borax  is  therefore  probably  intended 
by  him.    I  give  the  extract : 

L.   4.         DE  NIGELLO. 

Accipe  plumbum,  erame,  argentum  similiter  ;  confla  equales 
partes :  ipsis  in  igne  conflatis,  cum  carbone  vivo  misce,  postea 
addite  sulfur,  quantum  ut  per  totum  sint  ista  metalla  et  misce  cum 
carbone  vivo,  coque  sulfur,  et  cum  combustum  fuerit,  projice  in 
aliquo  loco  ubi  sit  aqua  clara,  et  cum  *  boraxa  '  distempera,  et 
scribe  in  curvaturis  quicquid  vis." 


'  "  HOW  TO  MAKE  KIELLO. 

"  When  you  wisli  to  make  niello,  take  equal  parts  of  quicksilver,  copper,  and  lead, 
and  put  them  in  a  vessel  that  they  may  cook  together.  Then  take  of  sulphur,  the 
weight  of  six  denarii,  and  mix  it  with  them  and  stir  it.  Afterwards  withdraw  it 
from  the  fire  and  allow  it  to  become  cold,  place  it  in  a  vase  and  take  atramentum, 
tempered  with  wine,  and  make  what  you  wish  upon  silver  with  the  atramentum,  and 
immediately  overlaying  the  powder  of  quicksilver,  copper,  and  lead,  and  then  melting 
it,  a  beautiful  niello  may  be  made." — Ah  Eraclio.  Ms.  Le  Beguc.    Paris.   Art.  251. 


430 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


"of  niello." 

Take  lead,  copper,  likewise  silver,  melt  equal  portions ;  being 
burned,  mix  them  with  live  charcoal,  afterwards  add  sulphur,  as 
much  as  is  the  total  of  the  metals,  and  mix  with  the  live  charcoal, 
cook  the  sulphur,  and  when  it  has  been  calcined,  cast  it  any- 
where, where  there  is  clear  water,  and  mix  it  with  "  borax  "  and 
paint  what  you  wish  in  the  circles. 

C.  XXXI. 

Take  wine-stone,  "  tollevini  petram." 

The  lees  of  wine  [fcex  vini)  were  burnt  by  the  ancients,  and  the 
cinders,  being  preserved,  were  applied  to  the  same  purposes  as  the 
potash,  or  soda,  the  cinders  of  vegetables.  Cinis  fsecis  vini  nitri 
naturam  habet,  easdemque  vires,  hoc  araplius,  quo  pinguior  sen- 
titur."^  The  lixivium  of  this  ash,  freed  from  impurities,  and 
again  evaporated,  produced  the  wine-stone  of  our  author,  the  bi- 
tartrate  of  potass,  or  cream  of  tartar,  of  commerce.  It  is  here 
directed  to  be  used  as  a  flux,  as  is  the  borate  of  soda  in  chap.  29. 
(see  notes  to  L.  2.  on  glass-painting.) 

C.  XXXII. 

The  reader  will  remark  the  operation  of  enriching  the  silver 
chalice  with  niello,  how  closely  it  resembles  the  preparation  of  an 
engraved  plate  for  printing.  It  is  said  that  the  accidental  impres- 
sion, or  proof  of  the  nielled  pax  of  Finiguerra  was  the  origin  of 
copper-plate  printing.  Upon  turning  to  C.  LXXI.,  the  process  de- 
scribed by  Theophilus,  for  blackening  or  nielling  copper,  which 
led  to  the  art  of  printing  from  an  engraved  copper  plate,  is  nearly 
a  description  of  the  art  itself.  Two  impressions  of  the  pax  exist 
in  Paris,  one  at  the  Bibliotheque  Royale,  another  at  the  Biblio- 
theque  de  1' Arsenal. 

C.  XXXV.,  XXXVI.,  XXXVII. 
The  mixture  of  quicksilver  with  the  powder  of  gold  aided  the 
'  Pliny,  L.  14.  C.  20. 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


431 


meclianical  process  of  gilding  after  the  working  and  polishing  of 
the  enamels  or  glass  gems,  a  process  which,  says  the  Abbe  Texier, 
is  always  observable  in  the  Romaic  gilt  and  enamelled  work  ;  sub- 
mitted to  a  moderate  heat,  sufficient  for  the  sublimation  of  the 
mercury,  the  "  electra,"  or  glass  gems  remained  uninjured.  The 
whole  process  is  worthy  attention  as  is  the  preparation  for  receiv- 
ing the  gilding  called  "  invivare,"  by  Theophilus,  consisting  of 
bitartrate  of  potass,  muriate  of  soda,  and  quicksilver. 

C.  XL.    «  OF  COLOURING  GOLD." 

The  process  here  described  is  calculated  to  produce  the  same 
action  upon  the  surface  of  an  impure  gold  as  that  followed  by 
submitting  it  to  the  action  of  a  diluted  muriatic  acid.  Atramentum, 
or  the  sulphate  of  copper,  (or  iron,)  having  been  partly  deprived 
of  the  sulphuric  acid  it  contains,  is  again  subjected  to  heat  in  the 
presence  of  muriate  of  soda  and  the  uric  salts,  upon  the  surface  of 
the  gold  to  be  purified.  The  result  would  form  a  certain  propor- 
tion of  muriatic  acid  which,  removing  the  alloy  it  might  contain, 
would  render  the  gold  pure,  thereby  colouring,  or  rather  de-co- 
louring the  metal. 

C.  XLV.    DE  FISTULA.— OF  THE  PIPE.  ^ 

The  reed,  called  also  syphon,  canna,  calamus,  etc.,  was  an  in- 
strument formerly  used  in  the  Roman  church  in  the  service  of 
communion,  in  order  to  withdraw  the  wine  from  the  chalice  for 
fear  of  spilling  it. 

Its  use  was  preserved  during  a  long  time  in  many  monasteries  - ; 
at  Cluny,  at  St.  Denis^,  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  consecration  of 
the  Kings  of  France  now  the  Pope  alone  employs  it  in  the  cele- 
bration of  Roman  ceremonies. 

The  Benedictines,  authors  of  the  Voyage  Litteraire,"  describe 
a  reed,  which  they  saw  in  the  treasury  of  the  Abbey  of  Corbie : 

'  Note,  by  the  Count  de  I'Escalopier, 

*  Bona,  Her.  Liturg.    L.  1.  C.  25.  N.  4.    Op.  Antwerp.  1793. 

'  De  Moleon  (Le  Brun  des  Marettes),  Voy.  Liturg.  de  Fr.  p.  149. 

*  Cancellieri,  De  Secretariis.    T.  4.  p.  1789.    Sylloge  vet.  mcnum. 


432 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


*'  It  had  a  small  cup  to  receive  the  precious  liquid  which  might 
fall  through  accident,  from  which,  in  such  case,  it  would  fall  back 
into  the  chalice  by  two  small  tubes.  The  instrument  was  some- 
times fixed  to  the  chalice." 

The  reed  was  unknown  to  the  Greeks. 

"  They  break  many  small  pieces  of  the  consecrated  bread,  which 
they  place  in  the  chalice.  They  have  a  small  spoon  with  which 
the  priest  takes  one  of  these  small  pieces  dipped  in  the  wine,  and  he 
thus  gives  it  to  the  communicants.  It  is  only  to  the  priests  and 
clerks  assisting  at  the  Liturgy  that  they  give  the  chalice.  The 
Greeks  assert  that  St.  John  Chrysostome  established  the  use  of 
this  spoon,  but  there  is  no  certain  proof  amongst  the  ecclesiastical 
writers.  According  to  the  legend  it  was  thus,  that  about  the  year 
400,  a  solitary  saint  of  Egypt  received  a  miraculous  Eucharist 
which  was  brought  to  him  by  angels. 

"  The  spoon  was  consecrated  as  well  as  the  chalice  and  patena. 
This  instrument,  unknown  to  the  Latins,  as  was  the  reed  to  the 
Greeks,  is  not  mentioned  by  Theophilus,  who  has  in  view  only  the 
pomps  of  the  Western  Church." 

C.  XLVIII.    DE  AURO  HISPANICO. 

When  the  smile,  excited  by  the  language  of  those  who  followed 
the  sacred  science,  "  iTria-Tvi^n  ispoc,"  or  chemistry,  shall  have 
passed,  we  shall  probably  be  anxious  to  search  into  the  meaning 
of  our  author. 

The  Egyptians,  according  to  all  authorities,  practised  the  science 
at  a  remote  period,  and  it  was  in  their  schools  that  the  Greeks  and 
Arabs  were  initiated  into  the  sacred  science,  the  revelation  of  the 
mysteries  of  which  was,  at  one  time,  punished  by  death. 

Theophilus,  who  informs  us  that  '*^the  skilfulness  of  the  Gentiles 
in  this  art  is  probable,"  is  doubtless  alluding  to  the  Arab  alche- 
mists of  Spain,  who  at  an  early  period  pursued  the  sciences  ac- 
quired from  the  Greeks  and  Egyptians. 

The  process  which  Theophilus  describes  in  this  symbolic  lan- 
guage, appears  no  other  than  that  for  procuring  a  pure  gold  by  the 
means  of  the  mineral  acids.  Let  a  solution  of  gold  be  made  by 
nitro-muriatic  acid  and  copper  be  introduced,  the  latter  would  be 
dissolved  while  the  gold  would  re-appear,  but  in  a  state  of  purity, 
or,  as  the  alchemists  would  have  expressed  it,  the  copper  would 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


433 


have  been  transmuted  into  pure  gold,  **  donee  ipsa  confectio  cuprum 
transmordeat,  et  inde  pondus  et  eolorem  auri  suscipiat." 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  ancients  were  aware  of  the  action 
upon  metals  of  substances  calculated  to  produce  the  mineral  acids 
in  the  art  of  refining,  and  that  the  Arab  alchemists  have  described 
these  acids  in  unequivocal  terms. — Numbers,  letters,  the  signs  of 
the  zodiac,  animals,  plants  and  organic  substances,  form  the  sym- 
bolic vocabulary  of  the  alchemists  of  this  period.  The  basilisc, 
the  dragon;,  the  red  and  green  lions,  were  the  sulphates  of  copper 
and  of  iron  ;  the  yellow  lion,  of  the  yellow  sulphurets  ;  the  black 
eagle,  the  black  sulphurets  ;  the  red  lion  was  sometimes  cinnabar ; 
the  salamander,  fire ;  milk  of  a  black  cow,  mercury  ;  the  egg, 
gold ;  the  red  dragon,  cinnabar  ;  &c.,  &c.  Unfortunately  each 
chemist  appears  to  have  varied  the  symbols  in  use  \ 

The  toad,  "  ugly  and  venomous,  bears  yet  a  precious  jewel  in 
its  head,"  ^  the  toads  of  Theophilus  which  hatch  the  eggs,  are 
probably  fragments  of  the  mineral  salt,  nitrate  of  potash,  which 
would  yield  one  of  the  elements  of  the  solvent  for  gold  ;  the  blood 
of  a  red  man,  which  has  been  dried  and  ground,  probably  a  mu- 
riate of  ammonia  ;  fine  earth,  a  muriate  of  soda  (common  salt)  ; 
the  cocks,  the  sulphates  of  copper  and  iron  ;  the  eggs,  gold  ore ; 
the  hatched  chickens,  which  require  a  stone  pavement,  sulphuric 
acid  produced  by  burning  these  in  a  stone  vessel,  collecting  the 
fumes  ;  these  are  then  all  digested  together  tempered  with  a  sharp 
acid.  The  elements  of  nitro-muriatic  acid  are  all  here,  the  sol- 
vent for  gold. 

Geber  tell  us  that  the  salt  drawn  from  the  ashes  of  a  mole  will 
convert  copper  into  gold.  "  Sal  totius  talpse  combustae  con- 
gelat  Mercurium  et  Venerem  convertit  in  Solem,  et  Martem  in 
Lunam." 

'  See  Ath,  Kircheri,  (Edip.  uEgypt.  Roma,  1653,  Vol.  2.  Jamblicus,  de  vita 
Pythagorica,  Leyd.  1570.  Idem,  de  mysteriis  jEgyptiorum,  Leipsic,  1815.  01. 
Borricliius,  de  Cabala  characterali  dissert.,  Leyd.  1649.  Idem,  Hermatis  ^gyptio- 
rum  et  Chemic.  Sapientia.  MSS.  Sloan.  3640.  3751.  3772.  2459.  3506,  &c.  Bib. 
Royale,  Paris,  MSS.  2329.  2250,  &c.  Arcanum  Hermeticse.  Anon.  Geneva,  1653. 
Hoefer,  Hist  de  la  chimie. 

2  It  is  not  the  drowning  man  only  who  "  catches  at  straws."  The  mind  of  Shake- 
spear  would  grasp  at  and  weave  a  beautiful  simile  from  the  meanest  object.  That 
Shakespear  was  acquainted  with  the  jargon  of  the  Alchemist,  who  can  doubt  1  The 
''basilisk"  of  Lady  Anne,  the  "confection"  of  the  Witches,  show  this,  as  do  the 
works  of  his  contemporary,  Jonson. 

F  F 


434 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


C.  LII.  SMIGMA. 

From  2|ita<y  or  I^/z.^^^ — a^'^^^a, — "  id  quo  ad  abstergendum  et 
purgandum  utimur." 

C.  LIV.    DE  ELECTRO. 

The  electrum  of  our  author  is  neither  amber,  nor  the  mixture  of 
silver  with  gold,  to  the  amount  of  one  fifth  part,  ("  Omni  auro 
inest  argentum  vario  pondere ;  ubicunque  quinta  argenti  portio 
est,  electrum  vocatur,"  ^)  which  was  called  by  the  Greeks  "  elec- 
tron." It  is  that  kind  of  uncut  glass  gem  which  is  so  frequently 
found  as  a  decoration  upon  coffers,  pyxes  and  crosses,  of  the 
tenth  to  the  fourteenth  centuries.  The  origin  of  the  term  is  proba- 
bly explained  by  Aldrovandus  {note  1,  p.  65  of  this  work).  Theo- 
philus  is  careful  in  his  directions  for  making  these  gems  ;  it  is  a 
process  of  enamelling,  set  in  filagree  work  (see  C.  LII.);  a  dis- 
tinction is  also  made  between  the  "lapis,"  which  is  an  opaque  stone 
of  rare  kind,  and  the  "  electrum,"  the  transparent  stone ;  these 
are  to  be  alternated  in  the  setting,  the  opaque  stone  being  orna- 
mented by  a  border  of  pearls  ^. 


C.  LXI.       THE  EVANGELISTS,  WHETHER  IN  LIKE- 
NESS OF  ANGELS  OR  FIGURES  OF  ANIMALS." 

By  the  Quinisext  council,  held  at  Constantinople  a.d.  692,  the 
Christian  artists  were  recommended  to  prefer  reality  to  allegory, 
and  were  ordered  to  represent  Christ  upon  the  cross.  The 
Greeks  had  previously  portrayed  Christ  under  different  allegorical 
forms  —  the  Good  Shepherd,  as  Orpheus  disarming  Cruelty  by 
means  of  the  suavity  of  his  accents  :  as  the  new  Daniel,  naked 
amongst  the  Lions,  which  are  disarmed  by  his  grace  :  as  Phcenix, 
conqueror  of  the  Spirits  of  Darkness,  &c.,&c.  The  pictures  brought 
from  Rome  by  Biscops,  during  the  papacy  of  John  V.,  a.d.  686, 
appear,  as  stated  by  Bede,  to  have  been  of  this  class.    "  Imagines 

1  Pliny,  L.  33,  C.  4. 

2  A  pyx,  of  the  eleventh  century,  was  lately  shown  me,  ornamented  in  this 
manner. 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


435 


quoque  ad  ornandum  monasterium  ecclesiamque  Beati  Pauli  nostri, 
de  Concordia  Veteris  et  Novi  Testamenti  summa  ratione  compo- 
sitas,  exhibuit.  Verbi  gratia,  Isaac  ligna  quibus  immolaretur 
portantem,  proxima  super  invicem  regionem  pictura  conjunxit. 
Item  serpenti  in  heremo  a  Moyese  exaltato,  filium  hominis  in  cruce 
exaltatum,  comparavit." — Vener.  Beda,  Hist.  Ab.  Wiremuth.  L.  1. 

The  four  rivers  of  Paradise  "in  human  form,"  and  the  Evange- 
lists "  in  figures  of  animals,"  are  a  remnant  of  the  iconography  of 
this  period. 

The  Athos  manuscript  shows  us  how  the  Greeks,  in  the  twelfth 
century,  represented  the  Evangelists ;  these  representations,  pro- 
bably, date  from  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century,  when  art  began 
to  recover  from  the  effects  of  the  persecution  suffered  by  the 
Greek  painters  owing  to  the  proscription  of  religious  images 
pronounced  by  Leo  the  Isaurian.  This  persecution  lasted  about 
150  years  ^ 

"  THE   FOUR  EVANGELISTS."^ 

Saint  Matthew  the  Evangelist,  as  an  old  man  with  a  long  beard' 
writing  "  Book  of  the  genealogy  of  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  David. 

Saint  Mark,  with  grey  hair  and  round  beard,  writing  "  The  be- 
ginning of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  God,  as  it  is  written." 

Saint  Luke,  young,  crisped  hair,  little  beard,  writing  "  Foras- 
much as  many  have  undertaken." 

Saint  John,  the  Theologos  and  Evangelist,  an  old  man,  bald, 
large  thin  beard,  seated  in  a  cave  :  he  turns  the  head  back  towards 
the  heavens,  the  right  hand  upon  the  knees,  the  left  extended  to- 
wards S,  Prochoros^.  Prochoros  is  seated  before  St.  John  writing 
these  words,  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God." 

Before  the  evangelists  the  Tetramorphe^  animals,  with  wings 
holding  the  Gospel :  they  turn  their  looks  towards  the  four  evan  - 

'  See  Emeric  David.    P.  114,  et  seq. 

*  Manuscript  from  Mount  Athos.    Didron.    Paris.  1845. 

'  Prochoros  is  a  clerk,  who  every  where  accompanied  St.  John,  and  who  often 
wrote  under  his  dictation. 

*  The  Tetramorphe  is  the  union  of  the  four  attributes  of  the  evangelists  in  one 
figure,  one  body  united  to  four  heads.  The  angel  of  St.  Matthew,  the  eagle  of  St. 
J ohn,  the  lion  of  St.  Mark,  and  the  bull  of  St.  Luke,  have  the  heads  grouped  upon 
a  winged  human  body,  the  four  gospels  forming  one.  The  Tetramorphe,  says  M. 
Didron,  is  rarely  seen  in  the  iconography  of  the  western  church,  but  is  frequent  in 
the  Greek,    nr^d  f4,o^(pri — four-form. 

F  F  2 


436  NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 

gelists,  as  follows.  Towards  St.  Matthew,  the  man ;  towards  St. 
Mark,  the  lion  ;  towards  St.  Luke,  the  bull ;  the  eagle  towards  St. 
John. 

Interpretation : — The  likeness  of  the  man  signifies  the  incarna- 
tion ;  of  the  lion,  power  and  royalty ;  of  the  bull,  preaching  and 
sacrifice  ;  of  the  eagle,  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
You  must  know,  also,  that  St.  Matthew,  St.  Mark,  and  St.  Luke 
are  represented  in  apartments  while  they  write  ;  but  that  St.  John 
is  represented  in  a  cave  with  Prochoros. 

C.  LXL 

"  You  will  adapt  to  each  Apostle  a  corresponding  prophet,  that 
their  testimonies  may  agree,"  writes  Theophilus. 

Our  author,  who,  it  has  been  seen,  wrote  for  the  provision  of 
the  ceremonies  of  the  Roman  church,  is  anxious  that  this  early 
branch  of  Christian  iconography  should  not  be  neglected.  Theo- 
philus has  afforded  us  so  few  points  by  which  we  may  be  enabled  to 
trace  the  period  at  which  he  wrote,  that  these  few  words,  hitherto 
neglected,  should  certainly  be  considered  if  at  all  bearing  upon  that 
question. 

Mons.  Didron,  who  has  paid  as  much,  if  not  more,  attention  to 
the  history  of  Christian  art  as  any  author,  and  whose  researches  in 
Greece  have  so  qualified  him  for  judging  upon  this  branch  of 
archaeology  that  his  opinion  may  be  accepted  as  authority,  de- 
clares that  the  higher  we  mount  into  the  history  of  Christianity, 
the  more  we  find  the  Judaic  influence  prevail.  *'  The  western 
church,  in  France  in  particular,  ended  by  withdrawing  itself  from 
this  Oriental  embrace,  but  traces  of  it  are  found  in  the  most 
ancient  of  our  monuments  and  liturgy."  St.  Moses,  St.  Samuel, 
St.  Daniel,  St.  Elias,  St.  Jeremiah,  St.  Isaiah,  all  the  holy  patri- 
archs, prophets,  and  teachers  of  the  law,  figure  in  the  ancient 
litanies.  "  In  the  cathedral  of  Strasburg,  upon  the  ancient  glass, 
some  of  which  dates  even  from  the  eleventh  century,  Isaiah  is 
seen  with  the  nimbus,  like  a  saint  of  the  New  Testament.  Stras- 
burg," he  adds,  "  is  German,  and  Germany  owes  much  to  Byzan- 
tium. The  Greek  Church  honours  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment as  much  as  those  of  the  New,  therefore  the  patriarchs, 
prophets,  judges,  and  kings  of  Judah,  occupy  an  important  place 
in  the  Byzantine  paintings." 

In  the  public  library  at  Amiens  is  a  manuscript  believed  to  be 


NOTES  TO   BOOK  III. 


437 


of  the  ninth  century,  but  which,  says  M.  Didron,  is  certainly  an- 
terior to  the  schism  consummated  by  Michael  Cerularius  ;  it  is  a 
book  of  psalms.  At  the  end  of  the  MS.  is  a  prayer,  a  litany  where 
all  the  orders  of  saints,  apostles,  &c.,  are  successively  invoked. 
Immediately  after  the  angels  and  before  the  apostles  the  patriarchs 
and  prophets  are  one  by  one  invoked.  Saint  Abraham,  St.  Moses, 
St.  Aaron,  St.  Samuel,  St.  David,  St.  Amos,  St.  Habbacuc,  &c. 
But  in  the  eleventh  century  this  fraternization  ceased,  and  the  re- 
spect which  had  until  then  existed  in  the  Roman  church  for  these 
personages  diminished,  the  Latins  "  became  rather  disdainful  of 
the  Old  Testament." 

Theophilus,  who  gives  few  iconographical  descriptions,  by  his 
careful  directions  for  a  practice,  by  which  the  prophets  of  the  Old 
and  the  apostles  of  the  New  Testaments  are  fraternized,  should 
have  lived  at  latest  in  the  commencement  of  the  eleventh  century  ^ 

C.  LXIII.  CALAMINE. 

The  calamine  or  cadmia  of  the  ancients,  which  Pliny  tells  was 
used  in  the  manufacture  of  brass,  lapis,  ex  quo  fit  ses,  cadmia 
vocatur,"  ^  is  the  rough  zinc  ore  ;  Dioscorides  informs  us  that  cad- 
mia is  produced  during  the  calcination  of  brass,  and  that  it  attaches 
itself  upon  the  sides  of  the  furnace  ^. 

•  This  respect,  which  the  Roman  church  gradually  lost  for  the  holy  characters  of 
the  Old  Testament,  and  which  M.  Didron  designates  as  the  "  Judaic  influence,"  has 
been  perpetuated  amongst  us  in  England,  which  has  also  otherwise  been  so  strongly 
impressed  by  the  Byzantine  genius. 

Our  finest  Gothic  cathedrals  are  upon  the  plan  of  the  double  or  Greek  cross ;  our 
liturgy  greatly  imbued  with  the  writings  of  the  Greek  Fathers. 

I  insert  a  note  of  the  learned  M.  Durand,  upon  the  effect  of  Jewish  and  Byzan- 
tine influence  upon  England.  It  is  singular,  that  no  sooner  does  a  Frenchman  ap- 
proach any  subject  with  which  England  is  connected,  than  his  ideas  seem  to  run  riot. 
There  is,  however,  some  truth  in  the  following.  "  The  names  of  Adam,  Isaac, 
Jacob,  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Solomon,  &c.,  are  very  common  in  Greece ;  there  is 
J ew  in  all  that.  It  would  seem  that  Byzantium,  nearer  than  Rome  to  J erusalem 
and  the  Holy  Land,  has  not  been  sufficiently  capable  of  escaping  from  the  -Old  Testa- 
ment. What  it  is  proper  to  remafjc  is,  that  England,  Jewish  hy  commerce,  is  Jewish 
and  Byzantine  in  her  religious  customs.  Bentham  is  called  Jeremiah, \  Reynold, 
Joshua;  Newton,  Isaac ;  GarricJc,  David ;  0\Connell  is  called  Daniel.  St.  George, 
the  patron  of  Greece^  and  to  whom  the  patriarchal  church  at  Constantinople  is  dedi- 
cated, is  patron  of  England.  England  gives  this  name  to  the  branch  of  the  sea 
which  separates  her  from  Ireland.    The  celebrated  Canning  wa's  called  Georges." 

'  Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.    L.  34.  C.  10. 

"  Dioscor.  Mat.  Med.    L.  5.  0.  84. 


438 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


The  difference  between  "aes"  and  "  aurichalcum,"  both  a  brass, 
is  taught  us  by  Theophilus  ;  "aes"  is  the  mixture  of  calamine  with 
unrefined  copper — "  aurichalcum  "  is  made  with  very  pure  copper, 
because  it  can  then  be  gilt.    C.  66. 

Bell  metal  is  made  by  adding  a  fifth  of  tin  to  melted  copper.  C. 
63. 

Theophilus  speaks  of  Spanish  brass,  as  used  in  thin  plates  in 
stamped  work.  This,  being  gilt,  is  probably  a  thin  plate  of  copper 
coated  with  gold  by  the  process  described  in  note  to  C.  48,  p. 
432. 

C.  LXXII.    INTERRASILIS  OPUS. 

Critics  have  differed  as  to  the  interpretation  of  this  word. 
"  Quod  nunc  scripturis  nunc  planitie  variatur  ;  hoc,  et  non  aliud, 
opus,  interrasile  dicas." — Alex.  By  this  would  be  intended  an 
engraved  work,  varied  with  plain  surfaces.  It  has  been  called 
Anaglypha  Scriptura,"  carved  work.  Muratori  thought  that  it 
applied  only  to  the  species  of  engraving  in  the  manner  of  seals. 
"  Quo  nomine  opinor,  non  omnem  cselaturam  designari,  sed  earn 
tantum,  quae  incidendo  figuras  efformabat,  ut  est  in  sigillis."  (V. 
2,  p.  360.)  Theophilus,  in  designating  this  as  Arabian  work,  has 
caused  Emeric  David  and  M.  de  I'Escalopier^  to  think  that  the 
word  interrasilis  means  Damascus  work,  "  damasquinure,"  or  the 
threaded  gold  or  silver  work  seen  upon  the  sabres,  pistols,  cui- 
rasses, &c.,  of  the  east.  We  fortunately  possess  a  chapter  in  this 
MS.  in  which  this  latter  art  is  carefully  detailed ;  the  damascine 
work  is  described  in  one  of  the  chapters  hitherto  unknown,  C.  90. 

The  opus  interrasilis,  then,  is  an  engraved  or  sculptured  plate, 
the  plain  grounds  of  which  are  cut  out  with  the  chisel,  or  "meizel," 
in  the  German.    Our  ancient  English  brasses  are  of  this  nature. 

C.  LXXV.    OF  STAMPED  WORK. 

This  branch  of  industry  has  already  been  followed  in  France 
since  the  publication  of  Theophilus  by  the  Count  de  I'Escalopier 
in  1843.  I  have  seen  some  bold  and  handsome  designs  from 
Paris,  executed  in  thin  gilt  copper,  in  this  fashion,  well  calculated 

'  Emeric  David.    Theophilus.    Biograph.  Univers, 

*  Theophili  Opera.    Paris.    1843.    Le  Comte  de  I'Escalopier. 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


439 


for  picture  frames,  if  fitted  to  wood,  or  for  ornamenting  apart- 
ments, &c.  A  simple  lever,  fitted  upon  a  tall  upright  post,  with  a 
weight  attached  to  one  end,  is  the  stamp  employed ;  the  other  ex- 
tremity of  the  lever  is  pulled  by  a  rope.  Our  Birmingham  and 
Sheffield  manufacturers  could,  were  proper  designs  procured  from 
our  artists,  defy  all  attempts  at  competition,  and  re-establish  a  ne- 
glected source  of  profit  and  industry. 

C.  LXXXI.    "  DE  ORGANIS." 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Harleian  MS.  of  Theophilus  enriches 
the  archaeologist  with  three  new  chapters  upon  the  construction  of 
the  organ,  which  seems  in  the  time  of  our  author  to  have  been  of  a 
simple  construction. 

David,  in  the  cl.  Psalm,  speaks  of  the  organ,  which  does  not 
appear  to  have  become  known  to  Western  Europe  until  the  year 
757,  when  one  was  sent  as  a  present  to  Pepin-le-Bref,  by  the  Em- 
peror Constantine  Copronymos. 

In  a  rare  Saxon  manuscript  of  the  eleventh  century, — Cotton, 
Tiberius,  B.  6,  page  18,  is  a  drawing  of  the  ^'  bumbulum  cum  fis- 
tula aerea,"  with  brass  pipe  ;  also  another  description  of  "  brass 
bumbula,  with  the  pipes  placed  in  the  middle,  three  bumbula 
placed  on  every  side."  This  Bumbulum  appears  to  be  an  organ, 
which  is  sounded  by  withdrawing  the  stops,  being,  as  the  organs 
of  Theophilus,  unfurnished  with  keys.  The  pipes  are  of  very 
thin  and  pure  copper. 

In  a  notice  of  the  ''Church  of  the  Holy  Cross,"  at  Binstead,  Isle 
of  Wight,  by  Mr.  Withers — (Weale's  Quarterly  Papers  on  Archi- 
tecture, Midsummer,  1845,)  which  church  is  of  early  Norman  erec- 
tion, a  recess  in  the  wall  on  the  north  side  of  the  chancel  remains 
unexplained,  as  that  gentleman  states  that  no  traces  exist  on  the 
outside  wall  to  show  that  a  sacristy  has  ever  existed  there.  Simi- 
lar recesses  are  found  in  our  early  Norman  churches  elsewhere, 
one  in  the  church  at  Beaulieu,  Hampshire,  if  I  am  not  mistaken. 

A  probable  solution  of  the  use  to  which  these  recesses  were  ap- 
plied is  found  in  the  83  C.  "  Si  volueris  organa  ultra  maceriam 
muri  stabilire,  ita  ut  infra  monasterium  nihil  appareat,"  &c.  They 
were  for  the  purpose  of  a  proper  arrangement  of  the  organ  and  the 
seat  of  the  organist,  at  that  time  the  chanter  also. 


440 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


C.  LXXXV. 

In  completing  the  directions  for  the  services  of  the  church, 
Theophilus  does  not  omit  the  foundry  for  bells,  of  which  a  minute 
description  is  given.  Four  parts  of  copper  and  a  fifth  of  tin  form 
the  composition  of  the  bell-metal.  Four  openings  are  made  near 
the  neck^  that  it  may  sound  better, — ut  melius  tinniat " — this 
precaution  is  often,  in  our  day,  neglected. 

CC.  LXXXVI.  AND  LXXXVII.   DE  CYMBALIS  MUSICIS. 

The  translation  of  the  86th  chapter  presents  difficulties  which 
will  be  allowed  by  all  who  consult  the  original  manuscript.  I 
have  strictly  followed  the  text. 

This  Hebrew  and  ancient  Greek  instrument  of  joy  and  worship 
was  introduced  into  the  ceremonies  of  the  Byzantine  church. 
They  were  employed  at  the  celebration  of  the  fetes  of  Cybele,  to 
whom  the  invention  is  attributed.  David,  in  the  cl.  Psalm,  speaks 
of  the  loud  cymbals  and  the  high  sounding  cymbals. 

The  cymbal  was  discontinued  upon  the  improvement  of  the 
mechanism  of  the  organ,  which,  however,  still  possesses  traces  of 
of  the  ancient  accompaniment  of  that  instrument,  one  part  being 
divided  into  the  great  and  second  cymbal. 

The  alloy  of  the  cymbals  of  Theophilus  is  about  a  fifth  or  sixth 
part  of  pure  tin  to  one  of  pure  copper. 

C.  XC.    DE  FERRO. 

This  curious  chapter  upon  iron  exposes  the  ancient  manner  of 
inlaying  steel  with  gold  and  silver,  known  to  be  of  Damascus 
origin ;  this  process,  as  that  of  the  interrasilis,  is  of  that  work 
which  "  distinguishes  Arabia,"  and  which  Theophilus  promises  in 
the  chapter  to  the  first  book. 

C.  XCII.    OF  SCULPTURING  IVORY. 

This  is  one  of  the  Italian  arts  of  the  period,  mentioned  also  in 
the  Preface  to  the  first  book. 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


441 


The  "  huso  "  is  the  sturgeon.  M.  de  I'Escalopier  remarks  that 
this  word,  of  Germanic  etymology,  may  strengthen  the  belief  in 
the  Germanic  origin  of  our  author. 

The  ancients  had  a  method  of  softening  and  bending  ivory  by 
immersion  in  different  solutions  of  salts  in  acid.  Eraclius  has  a 
chapter  on  this.  "  Should  you  wish  to  bend  ivory  and  ornament 
it."  Take  sulphate  of  potass,  (glumen  rotundum^,)  fossil  salt,  (sal 
gemma,  muriate  of  soda,)  and  vitriol,  {calcanthum,  sulphate  of 
copper,)  these  are  ground  with  very  sharp  vinegar  in  a  brass  mortar. 
Into  this  mixture  the  ivory  is  placed  for  three  days  and  nights. 
This  being  done,  you  will  hollow  out  a  piece  of  wood,  as  you 
please.  The  ivory  being  then  placed  in  the  hollow  you  direct  it, 
and  will  bend  it  to  your  will. 

In  the  MS.  Sloane,  416,  p.  40,  already  quoted,  is  a  similar  re- 
cipe, with  the  addition  that  these  matte^-s  are  to  be  distilled  in 
equal  parts,  (per  alembicum,)  this  would  yield  muriatic  acid,  with 
the  presence  of  water ;  the  MS.  adds  that  "  infused  in  this  water 
half  a  day,  ivory  is  made  so  soft  that  it  can  be  cut  like  wax. 
And  when  you  wish  it  hardened,  place  it  in  white  vinegar  and  it 
becomes  hard." 

C.  XCIIl.  RUBRICA. 

The  rubrica,  or  rubea  radix,  was  the  Iov^do^olvov  of  the  Greeks ; 
the  red  root,  or  madder. 

Walnut  oil  is  here  alluded  to  as  used  in  the  arts  for  the  purpose 
of  preserving  ornaments  in  ivory. 


C.  XCIV.    "  CHRISTALLUM." 

That  crystal  was  a  stone  produced  by  the  long  continued  action 
of  cold  upon  water  is  but  the  opinion  of  Pliny,  perpetuated  by 
our  author.  "  Contraria  huic  causa  crystallinum  facit,  gelu  vehe- 
mentiore  concreto.  Non  aliubi  certe  reperitur,  quam  ubi  maxime 
hybernae  nives  rigent :  glaciemque  esse  certum  est :  unde  et  nomen 
Grseci  dedere."    Plato  taught  that  condensed  water  became  ul- 

'  Should  this  "  glumen  rotundum  "  be  a  nitrate  of  potass,  another  active  element 
would  be  added  to  this  composition. 


442 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


timately  transformed  into  stones  and  earth,  and  Thales,  before 
him,  that     water  is  the  principle,  or  origin,  of  all  matter." 

The  word  "  tentura,"  again  of  Germanic  etymology,  would  show, 
that  if  not  German,  Theophilus  wrote  for  the  instruction  of  that 
people.  Isca,  which  I  have  rendered  tinder,  properly  means  the 
pith,  or  "medulla"  of  plants,  which  was  also  used  for  the  ready 
production  of  fire. 

"  Ismaris  lapis  "  I  have  translated  "  emery,"  as  the  S/x-ipj?  x/6o?  of 
Dioscorides  and  Hesychius,  anciently  known  for  cutting  and 
polishing  gems. 

C.  XCVII.  WOAD. 

The  corn  poppy  was  much  used  in  order  to  produce  a  blue 
vegetable  colour  for  illuminating,  before  the  introduction  of  indigo, 
which  gradually  superseded  it.  "Endico"  was  a  name,  however, 
given  to  the  blue  colour  produced  from  woad  in  imitation  of  in- 
digo, as  late  as  the  14th  and  15th  centuries  in  Italy;  see  MS. 
Sloane,  416,  p.  134.  "A  Fare  Endico.  Toy  fiore  de  guado  e 
creta  biancha,  poy  toy  dele  granele  de  lebio  qu  sono  ben  mature,  e 
toi  rane  e  fali  bolire  al  fuoco  tanto  che  siano  chote,  e  poi  le  spumi 
e  deguela  spremitura  getano  sopra  le  dite  polvere  ; "  &c. 

C.  XCVIII.    DE  LACCA. 

The  lake  of  the  Greeks,  probably  so  called  from  >.ccKKoq,  a  hollow, 
or  cut,  was  made,  Eraclius  and  our  author  inform  us,  by  making 
an  incision  in  the  ivy  in  spring,  and  boiling  the  sap,  which  exudes, 
with  urine. 

The  "  phoenix  color,"  or  phoenicia,  or  fenicon,  is  a  red  or  rosy 
colour,  probably  made  from  the  oster,  and  the  Tyrian  red ;  for 
which  this  lake  was  substituted. 

C.  CVI.    CANDIDUM  SULPHUR. 

The  "  three  kinds  of  sulphur,  white,  black,  and  yellow,"  men- 
tioned by  our  author,  L.  1.  c.  36,  were  not  always  the  metal 
Sulphur  in  various  states  of  purity. 

The  "  pompholyx  "  of  the  ancients,  which  was  produced  by  the 


NOTES  TO  BOOK  III. 


443 


calcination  (in  a  close  vessel  fitted  with  an  upper  chamber)  of 
brass  or  of  calamine,  appears  to  have  been  the  white  sulphur  of 
the  Byzantines  and  Arabs.  Both  these  substances  generally  con- 
tained arsenic,  the  volatilization  of  which,  with  that  of  the  zinc, 
would  produce  a  mixture  of  the  oxides  of  arsenic  and  zinc ;  the 
deposition  in  the  lower  chamber,  of  a  darker  colour  and  less  pure, 
were  combinations  of  the  zinc  with  other  substances,  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  ore  calamine  employed,  and  was  called 
spodium  ^ 

Geber  tells  us  that  "  arsenic  is  composed  of  subtle  matter,  and  is 
of  the  nature  of  sulphur;  it  h  fixed  by  the  metals,  like  sulphur,  and 
like  it  is  produced  by  the  calcination  of  the  nietals:"  (is  not  this 
the  white  sulphur  of  the  Greeks  ?)  *•  Therefore  it  is  not  proper  to 
be  classed  (diffiniri)  otherwise  than  sulphur.'*^ 

Albertus  Magnus,  whose  writings  are  in  great  measure  a  re- 
sume of  the  Greek  and  Arab  chemists,  tells  us  that  brass  will 
yield  arsenic  ;  "  aes  expirabit  arsenicum."^ 

The  0e7oi/  XiVKov,  white  sulphur,  was  that  which  produced  white 
brass  :  Olympiodorus  knew  that  arsenic  gave  a  white  colour  to 
copper,  and  he  calls  it  a  kind  of  sulphur  which  is  volatilized  by  the 
action  of  fire.    MS.  2250,  Bib.  Roi/ale,  Par. 

Richardus  Anglicus,  who  appears  to  have  been  contemporaneous 
with  Roger  Bacon,  tells  us  that  "white  sulphur  fixes  (coagulat) 
quicksilver  he  adds  that  "  there  is  no  sulphur  in  silver  but  the 
white  sulphur."  ^ 

An  impure  mixture  of  oxide  of  arsenic  with  zinc  or  tin,  would, 
mixed  with  white  glass,  yield  an  opaque  flux,  proper  for  painting 
on  earthenware. 

DE  MIXTURA  COLORUM. 

Maptizabis,  a  Romaic  term  from  "  Mappa,"  a  drawing,  or 
picture. 

'  Pliny.  L.  34.  C.  13. 

'  Greberi  Opera,  de  arsenico."  C.  29. 
'  Albertus  Magnus,  de  rebus  metallicis. 

*  The  edition  of  Geber,  printed  at  Nurimberg,  1545,  contains  a  treatise  of 
"  Richard,  the  Englishman,"  upon  alchemy.    See  C.  12,  of  that  treatise. 


FINIS. 


INDEX. 


A. 

AoiDS,  minerals,  known  indirectly  to  the 

ancients,  426. 
Alithina,  63. 

Amber   varnish,    xxxi.   xxxii.  xxxv. 
xxxvi. 

Anglo-Saxons,  state  of  art  among,  viii. 
Anvils,  of,  213. 
Apostles  and.  prophets,  436. 
Apulia,  white  of,  417. 
Arabs,  influence  of,  ix. 
Arab  alchemists,  432. 
Arxica,  or  arsicon,  orzarquaon,  a  prot- 
oxide of  lead,  67. 
Atramentum,  75,  76.  257.  315.  327. 
Aureola,  a  transparent  oil  painting,  35. 
Auricalcum,  313. 

Auripigmentum,   orpiment,  description 

of,  53. 
Azure,  to  make,  423. 

B. 

Basilisc,  267. 

Beards,  of  young  and  old  men,  9. 

Beaten  work,  323. 

Bellows,  of,  211. 

Bells,  of  founding,  355.  440. 

Black,  7.  9.  11.  15.  17.  19. 

 description  of,  94. 

Blue  glass,  to  paint,  166.  171. 
Brass,  to  grind,  39. 

 of  its  composition,  311. 

 fine,  to  gild,  315. 

Bresil  wood,  62.  413.  415. 
Bumbulum,  439. 

C. 

Calamine,  307.  311.  437. 
Carbon  furnished  in  tempering  steel, 
425. 

Carbuncle,  to  make  a,  174. 
Carnelian,  to  make  a,  176. 
Censer,  the  beaten,  291. 

 the  cast,  293. 

Ceruse,  3.  13. 


Ceruse  and  carmine,   not  mixed  with 
gum,  but  with  glair e,  35. 

 to  make,  49. 

 description  of,  54. 

Chains,  of  the,  303. 

Chalice,  of  ornamenting  the,  259. 

  of  its  foot,  261. 

 of  gold,  269. 

 of  its  foot,  285. 

  the  smaller,  231. 

  the  larger,  235. 

  the  handles  of,  239. 

Chalk,  with  colours  on  plaster,  17. 
Cheese-glue,  21. 

Chrysolite,  to  make,  165.  168.  175. 
Cinnabar,  3.  13.  17.  19.  21.  25.  39. 

 to  make,  45. 

 description  of,  55. 

Colours  for  flesh,  mixture,  3. 

 ground  in  oil,  25.  33. 

 giiva,  35. 

 how  often  applied  upon  wood, 

35. 

 tempering  for  books,  43. 

 for  parchment,  419. 

 mixtures  of,  419. 

Copper,  of,  305. 

 purification  of,  313. 

 to  blacken,  319. 

 to  gild  with  gall,  407. 

 to  grind,  39. 

Crosses  in  the  nimbus,  182. 
Crucibles,  of,  227. 
Crystal,  387.  441. 

Cupellation,  known  to  the  ancients,  425. 

Cutting  instruments,  221. 

Cyanus  lapis,  78. 

Cymbals,  of,' 369. 

 of  musical,  371.  440. 

D. 

Damascus  work,  377.  440. 

Dexter,  signans,  427. 

Distilled  linseed  and  walnut  oils,  xxxv. 

Drapery,  colours  for,  11.  13.  15. 

 on  walls,  17. 


INDEX. 


445 


E. 

Earttenware  painted  with  glass  colours, 

135.  177. 
Egyptian  blue,  79. 
Elder-berry,  colour  from,  15. 
Electra,  279.  434. 

  to  polish,  283. 

Emerald,  to  make,  165.  167,  168.  171. 

175. 
Enamel,  279. 

  red,  181. 

  green,  181. 

 white,  181. 

Encaustic,  corruption  of  the  term,  95. 
Eraclius,  work  of,  upon  art,  xiii. 
Evangelists,  figures  of,  435. 
Exudra  and  other  colours  of  faces,  11. 
•  what,  57. 

F. 

Factory,  for  working  metals,  209. 
Files,  hollow,  for  filagree,  217. 

  various,  223. 

Fistula,  the  pipe,  431, 
Flavus,  colour,  or  massicot,  57. 
Flesh  colour,  3. 

 on  walls,  17. 

Flowers,  colours  from,  393. 

Flux  for  glass,  133.  164. 167.  170.  173, 

174. 176. 
Folium,  11.  13.  15.  17.  19.  21. 
  red,  purple  and  blue,  to  temper, 

43. 

•   what,  58. 

  different  kinds  of,  59, 60,  61,  62, 

63. 

Fornis,  gum,  25.  27.  66. 
Fsefosis,  xxxvi. 
Furnace,  for  metals,  211. 

Gf. 

Grallien  glass,  to  make,  168. 
Grarnet,  to  make,  168.  175. 
Gebbr,  mineral  acids,  427. 
Gems,  of  sculpturing,  403. 

 cutting,  405. 

 polishing,  387.  403. 

 and  pearls,  to  apply  upon  gold, 

275. 

Gilding,  Byzantine,  430. 

  to  polish,  255. 

  old,  to  clean,  339. 

Glaire  of  egg,  41. 
Glass  furnace,  119. 

 annealing  oven,  121. 

 dilating  oven,  121. 

 composition  of,  123. 

 plate,  125. 

 yellow  stained,  127. 


Glass,  purple  stained,  127. 

 of  dilating,  129. 

 vases,  to  make,  129. 

 bottles,  to  make  131. 

 coloured  mosaics,  131. 

 coloured   plates,  made   by  the 

French,  131. 

 Greek  cups  decorated  with  gold 

and  silver,  133. 

 painting  upon,  133. 

 Greek,  for  gold  grounds,  186. 

 for  mosaic  work,  135. 

 windows,  to  compose,  137. 

 to  divide,  139. 

 colour  for  drawing  upon,  141. 

 of  three  shade  tints  for,  141. 

 of  painting  coloured  drapery,  &c., 

on  glass,  141. 

 yellow,  not  to  be  too  much  em- 
ployed, 143. 

 of  burning  in,  upon,  145. 

 of  ornamenting  with  gems,  153. 

 of  repairing  broken,  155.  183. 

 rings,  157. 

 Egyptian,  remains  of,  161. 

 Roman,  opaque,  162. 

 from  lead,  165. 

 malleable,  a  fallacy,  183. 

 painting  upon ;  the  invention  of, 

xi. 

 to  sculpture,  397. 

 a  painting  upon,  399. 

 white,  opaque,  401. 

Glassa,  27. 

 what,  64. 

 67— called  grassa,  67.  73. 

Glue,  of  cheese,  21. 

 skins,  23. 

 vellum,  43. 

 eel-skin,  43. 

 the  wolf-fish,  43. 

Gluten  vernition,  24.  64. 
Gold,  of  heating,  245.  247. 

 grinding,  247.  249.  251. 

  to  colour,  257.  431. 

 Hevilath,  265.; 

•  Arabia,  265. 

 Spanish,  267.  432. 

 sand,  269. 

 solder  of,  271. 

 to  separate  from  copper,  317. 

 silver,  317. 

 to  clean,  341. 

Gold  writing,  393. 

Gold-leaf,  to  make,  29. 

Gold-leaf,  to  apply,  31. 

Gold,  to  grind,  37. 

Gold,  to  lay  in  books,  39. 

Gorma-madder,  60. 

Greek  paper,  made  from  linen,  29. 


446 


INDEX. 


Greek  pitch,  70,  71. 

Green,  15.  17.  19.  395.  397. 

Green,  salt  (or  acid),  to  make,  47. 

 Spanish,  to  make,  47. 

Green  glass,  163.  399.  401. 

Gum  Arabic,  a  name  for  Arabic  resin, 

or  sandarac,  72. 
Gum  cherry,  or  plum-tree,  35. 
Gummi  fornis,  what,  63. 
Gunpowder,  known  to  the  Greeks,  v. 
Gypsum,  white  ground  of,  23. 

H. 

Hair  of  boys,  youths,  and  young  men, 

colours  for,  9. 
Hammers,  216. 

Handles  of  chalices,  to  freshen  and 

gild,  253. 
Haematite,  105. 
Hyacinth,  to  make,  168,  175. 
Hysginum,  60. 

I. 

Indigo,  15.  76. 
Ink,  to  make,  49. 

 description  of,  74. 

 acid,  known  to  the  Romans,  75. 

Instrument  for  making  wires,  215. 

 for  making  nails,  221. 

Interrasilis  opus,  438. 
Iron,  of,  377.  440. 
Isca,  388. 

Isinglass,  from  the  fish  "huso,"  39.  407. 
Ivory,  of  sculpturing,  383.  440. 

 of  reddening,  385. 

 of  ornamenting  with  gold  leaf,  405. 

Ivy  and  lake,  395. 

K. 

Karabe,  amber,  65. 

L. 

Lacca,  61.  395.  442. 
Lapis  Lazuli,  77. 

 for  a  blue  glass,  168. 

Laqueari,  plaster  work,  76. 
Lazur,  11.  13.  17.  21. 
  what,  77. 

Lazur-stein,  or  Lapis  Armenus,  79. 
Letters,  gold,  silver,  copper,  brass,  or 

iron,  421. 
Limbus,  81. 

Lime,  with  colours  on  walls,  17.  21. 

Lineleon,  96. 

Litters,  painted,  27. 

Lost  Chapters,  The,  163. 

M. 

Madder,  63. 


Malleable  work,  irons  for,  219. 

Manisc,  11.  15.  17.  19.  21. 

 what,  81. 

Maptizabis,  443. 

Marca,  what,  427. 

Massicot,  58. 

Miltos,  what,  103. 

Minium,  to  make,  49. 

•   description  of,  82. 

  not  mixed  with  gum,  but  with 

glair e,  35. 

Minium,  5.  13.  25.  39. 

Morella,  a  folium,  59. 

Mosaic  work,  xxxvii. 

Moulds,  iron,  for  leaden  rods  for  win- 
dows, 147. 

  wooden,  for  the  same,  149. 

  iron,  221. 

Murus  recens,  84. 

N. 

Nails,  of,  333. 
Niello,  of,  237.  428. 

 to  apply,  239. 

 to  apply  also,  243. 

 to  polish,  257. 

Nummus,  what,  427. 
N norma,  madder,  60. 

0. 

Ochre,  13.  17.  19.  21. 

 burnt,  5. 

Oil,  linseed,  25.  27.  35.  94. 

 walnut,  25.  385. 

 poppy;  25. 

 drying,  97,  98. 

Oily  mucilage  for  tempering  colours, 

100. 
Oleum  lini,  94. 
Organs,  of,  341.  439. 

 of  the  case  of,  345. 

 of  the  wind  case,  349. 

 of  the  copper,  construction  and 

its  bellows,  353. 
Organarium,  the,  217. 
Orpiment,  13. 

 not  used  upon  walls,  15. 

 description  of,  35. 

Origin  of  printing,  430. 

P. 

Painting  upon  glass,  186,  187, 188, 189. 
Parahas,  or  barabas,  239.  429. 
Patena,  of  the,  261. 

 the  gold,  285. 

Pearls,  391. 
Pes§ri,  73. 

Pipe,  of  the,  263.  431. 


INDEX. 


447 


Pipe,  the  gold,  285. 

Pierced  work,  interrasilis  opus,  321. 

Pincers,  215. 

Plaster,  painting  on,  11. 

Pose,  first,  5.  100. 

 second,  7.  17. 

Prasinus,  colour,  3.  17.  101. 
Punched  work,  323. 

R. 

Rainbow,  imitation  of,  17. 
Realgar,  red  orpiment,  54. 
Red,  from  burnt  ochre,  5.  19. 
Relief,  first,  5. 

 second,  9. 

Rods,  leaden,  for  windows,  149. 
Rose  colour  first,  5. 

 second,  7. 

Rubrica,  441. 

Ruby,  to  make,  172 — 175. 

S. 

Saddles,  painted,  27.  102. 
Saffron,  33.  41. 
Sandaloz,  74. 

Sandarac,  Arabic  resin,  64. 
Sandaracha,  orpiment,  53. 
Sapphire,  Greek,  77. 

 Glass,  165. 

 to  make  a,  167, 168. 175,  176. 

Scraping  irons,  219. 
Sculping  irons,  219. 
Sculptured  beaten  work,  337. 
Shave-grass,  23. 
Sil  Atticum,  56. 
Silver  to  grind,  39. 

 lay,  in  books,  39. 

 purify,  227. 

 melt,  229. 

 solder,  241. 

 clean,  341. 

Sinoper,  29,  415. 

  description  of,  103. 

Smigma,  271.  339.  434. 

Smiris,  or  israaris  stone,  what,  442. 

Soldering  gold  and  silver  together,  335. 

 tin,  375. 

 ^  iron,  381. 

Spanish  Green,  to  be  mixed  with  gum 
gluten,  35. 

 •  what,  102. 

Spout,  to  cast  a,  375. 

Stamped  work,  329.  438. 

Strainer,  the,  285. 

Succus,  13.  15.  19. 

 not  used  upon  walls,  15. 


Succus,  description  of,  106. 
Sulphur,  white,  black  and  yellow,  45. 
4U1.  442. 


T. 

Tablets  of  altars,  to  join,  21. 
Tempering  files,  223. 

 iron,  225. 

 various  coloixrs,  411,  417. 

Tenax,  composition  called,  289. 
Tentura,  442. 
Thrones,  19.  106. 
Tin-leaf,  to  make,  31. 

 colour,  33. 

 varnish,  33. 

Tin,  ground,  for  books,  41. 
Topaz,  to  make,  168.  175. 
Transparent  oil  painting,  35. 
Turquoise,  to  make  a,  176. 

V. 

Van  Eyck,  inventions  of,  xxxii.  xxxiii. 
Varnish,  25.  27.  63—74. 

  to  apply,  35. 

Veneda,  a  tint,  7.  17.  21.  107. 
Verantia-madder,  63. 
Vermilion,  or  cinnabar,  57.  421 . 
Vernice  liquida,  69,  70. 
Vernix,  sandarac,  66. 
Vial  of  the,  287. 
Vials  of  tin,  371. 
Violet  glass,  171. 
Viride  Grecum,  102. 
Vitriol  (atramentum,  or  sulphate  of  iron), 
51. 

W. 

Walls,  painting  upon,  17. 

 preparation  for  painting  upon,  17. 

 to  paint  on  while  wet,  84. 

 Greek  method  of  painting  on,  86 

to  93. 

Walnut  oil,  distillation  of,  xxxiv,  xxxv. 

Warancia,  madder,  60. 

Water,  signs  of,  409. 

Windows,  of  joining  and  soldering,  151. 

 to  compose,  137.  184. 

 plain,  155. 

Wine-stone,  315.  430. 
Woad,  442. 

Y. 

Yolk  of  egg,  with  colours,  on  walls,  17. 


G.  Woodfall  and  Son,  Printers,  Angel  Court,  Skinner  Street,  London. 


r 


I 


